Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, K. Nordquist, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This book was produced from scanned images of public
domain material from the Google Print project.)


  [Illustration: THE MAN WAS UPON HIS FEET, NOW, BENDING TOWARDS HER
   WITH ARMS OUTSTRETCHED. Drawing by Monahan.]


                            The Gold Girl


                                  By

                           James B. Hendryx

     Author of "The Promise," "The Gun-Brand," "The Texan," etc.


                         G. P. Putnam's Sons

                         New York and London

                       The Knickerbocker Press

                                 1920


                           COPYRIGHT, 1920

                                  BY

                           JAMES B. HENDRYX

       *       *       *       *       *


CONTENTS


CHAPTER                                          PAGE

I.--A HORSEMAN OF THE HILLS               1

II.--AT THE WATTS RANCH                  10

III.--PATTY GOES TO TOWN                 30

IV.--MONK BETHUNE                        47

V.--SHEEP CAMP                           65

VI.--BETHUNE PAYS A CALL                 81

VII.--IN THE CABIN                       98

VIII.--PROSPECTING                      111

IX.--PATTY TAKES PRECAUTIONS            129

X.--THE BISHOP OF ALL OUTDOORS          146

XI.--LORD CLENDENNING GETS A DUCKING    162

XII.--BETHUNE TRIES AGAIN               180

XIII.--PATTY DRAWS A MAP                198

XIV.--THE SAMUELSONS                    219

XV.--THE HORSE RAID                     239

XVI.--PATTY FINDS A GLOVE               263

XVII.--UNMASKED                         288

XVIII.--PATTY MAKES HER STRIKE          308

XIX.--THE RACE FOR THE REGISTER         327

       *       *       *       *       *


The Gold Girl

CHAPTER I

A HORSEMAN OF THE HILLS


Patty Sinclair reined in her horse at the top of a low divide and
gazed helplessly around her. The trail that had grown fainter and
fainter with its ascent of the creek bed disappeared entirely at the
slope of loose rock and bunch grass that slanted steeply to the
divide. In vain she scanned the deeply gored valley that lay before
her and the timbered slopes of the mountains for sign of human
habitation. Her horse lowered his head and snipped at the bunch grass.
Stiffly the girl dismounted. She had been in the saddle since early
noon with only two short intervals of rest when she had stopped to
drink and to bathe her fare in the deliciously cold waters of mountain
streams--and now the trail had melted into the hills, and the broad
shadows of mountains were lengthening. Every muscle of her body ached
at the unaccustomed strain, and she was very hungry. She envied her
horse his enjoyment of the bunch grass which he munched with much
tongueing of the bit and impatient shaking of the head. With bridle
reins gripped tightly she leaned wearily against the saddle.

"I'm lost," she murmured. "Just plain _lost_. Surely I must have come
fifty miles, and I followed their directions exactly, and now I'm
tired, and stiff, and sore, and hungry, and lost." A grim little smile
tightened the corners of her mouth. "But I'm glad I came. If Aunt
Rebecca could see me now! Wouldn't she just gloat? 'I told you so, my
dear, just as I often told your poor father, to have nothing whatever
to do with that horrible country of wild Indians, and ferocious
beasts, and desperate characters.'" Hot tears blurred her eyes at the
thought of her father. "This is the country he loved, with its
mountains and its woods and its deep mysterious valleys--and I want to
love it, too. And I _will_ love it! I'll find his mine if it takes me
all the rest of my life. And I'll show the people back home that he
was right, that he did know that the gold was here, and that he
wasn't just a visionary and a ne'er-do-well!"

A rattle of loose stones set her heart thumping wildly and caused her
to peer down the back trail where a horseman was slowly ascending the
slope. The man sat loosely in his saddle with the easy grace of the
slack rein rider. A roll-brim Stetson with its crown boxed into a peak
was pushed slightly back upon his head, and his legs were encased to
the thighs in battered leather chaps whose lacings were studded with
silver _chonchas_ as large as trade dollars. A coiled rope hung from a
strap upon the right side of his saddle, while a leather-covered jug
was swung upon the opposite side by a thong looped over the horn. All
this the girl took in at a glance as the rangy buckskin picked his way
easily up the slope. She noted, also, the white butt-plates of the
revolver that protruded from its leather holster. Her first impulse
was to mount and fly, but the futility of the attempt was apparent. If
the man followed she could hardly hope to elude him upon a horse that
was far from fresh, and even if she did it would be only to plunge
deeper into the hills--become more hopelessly lost. Aunt Rebecca's
words "desperate character" seemed suddenly to assume significance.
The man was very close now. She could distinctly hear the breathing of
his horse, and the soft rattle of bit-chains. Despite her defiant
declaration that she was glad she had come, she knew that deep down in
her heart, she fervidly wished herself elsewhere. "Maybe he's a
ranchman," she thought, "but why should any honest man be threading
unfrequented hill trails armed with a revolver and a brown leather
jug?" No answer suggested itself, and summoning her haughtiest,
coldest look, she met the glance of the man who drew rein beside her.
His features were clean-cut, bronzed, and lean--with the sinewy
leanness of health. His gray flannel shirt rolled open at the throat,
about which was loosely drawn a silk scarf of robin's-egg blue, held
in place by the tip of a buffalo horn polished to an onyx luster. The
hand holding the bridle reins rested carelessly upon the horn of his
saddle. With the other he raised the Stetson from his head.

"Good evenin', Miss," he greeted, pleasantly. "Lost?"

"No," she lied brazenly, "I came here on purpose--I--I like it here."
She felt the lameness of the lie and her cheeks flushed. But the man
showed no surprise at the statement, neither did he smile. Instead,
he raised his head and gravely inspected the endless succession of
mountains and valleys and timbered ridges.

"It's a right nice place," he agreed. To her surprise the girl could
find no hint of sarcasm in the words, nor was there anything to
indicate the "desperate character" in the way he leaned forward to
stroke his horse's mane, and remove a wisp of hair from beneath the
headstall. It was hard to maintain her air of cold reserve with this
soft-voiced, grave-eyed young stranger. She wondered whether a
"desperate character" could love his horse, and felt a wild desire to
tell him of her plight. But as her eyes rested upon the brown leather
jug she frowned.

The man shifted himself in the saddle. "Well, I must be goin'," he
said. "Good evenin'."

Patty bowed ever so slightly, as he replaced the Stetson upon his head
and touched his horse lightly with a spur. "Come along, you Buck,
you!"

As the horse started down the steep descent on the other side of the
divide a feeling of loneliness that was very akin to terror gripped
the girl. The sunlight showed only upon the higher levels, and the
prospect of spending the night alone in the hills without food or
shelter produced a sudden chilling sensation in the pit of her
stomach.

"Oh! Please----"

The buckskin turned in his tracks, and once more the man was beside
her upon the ridge.

"I _am_ lost," she faltered. "Only, I hated to admit it."

"Folks always do. I've be'n lost a hundred times, an' I never _would_
admit it."

"I started for the Watts's ranch. Do you know where it is?"

"Yes, it's over on Monte's Creek."

Patty smiled. "I could have told _you_ that. The trouble is, someone
seems to have removed all the signs."

"They ought to put 'em up again," opined the stranger in the same
grave tone with which he had bid her good evening.

"They told me in town that I was to take the left hand trail where it
forked at the first creek beyond the canyon."

The man nodded. "Yes, that about fits the case."

"But I did take the trail that turned to the left up the first creek
beyond the canyon, and I haven't seen the slightest intimation of a
ranch."

"No, you see, this little creek don't count, because most of the time
it's dry; an' this ain't a regular trail. It's an' old winter road
that was used to haul out cord wood an' timber. Monte's Creek is two
miles farther on. It's a heap bigger creek than this, an' the trail's
better, too. Watts's is about three mile up from the fork. You can't
miss it. It's the only ranch there."

"How far is it back to the trail?" asked the girl wearily.

"About two mile. It's about seven mile to Watts's that way around.
There's a short cut, through the hills, but I couldn't tell you so
you'd find it. There's no trail, an' it's up one coulee an' down
another till you get there. I'm goin' through that way; if you'd like
to come along you're welcome to."

For a moment Patty hesitated but her eyes returned to the jug and she
declined, a trifle stiffly. "No, thank you. I--I think I will go
around by the trail."

Either the man did not notice the curtness of the reply, or he chose
to ignore it, for the next instant, noting the gasp of pain and the
sudden tightening of the lips that accompanied her attempt to raise
her foot to the stirrup, he swung lightly to the ground, and before
she divined what he was about, had lifted her gently into the saddle
and pressed the reins into her hand. Without a word he returned to his
horse, and with face flushed scarlet, the girl glared at the powerful
gray shoulders as he picked up his reins from the ground. The next
moment she headed her own horse down the back trail and rode into the
deepening shadows. Gaining the main trail she urged her horse into a
run.

"He--he's awfully strong," she panted, "and just _horrid!_"

From the top of the divide the man watched until she disappeared, then
he stroked softly the velvet nose that nuzzled against his cheek.

"What d'you reckon, Buck? Are they goin' to start a school for that
litter of young Wattses? There ain't another kid within twenty
mile--must be." As he swung into the saddle the leather covered jug
bumped lightly against his knee. There was a merry twinkle of laughter
in his blue eyes as, with lips solemn as an exhorter's, he addressed
the offending object. "You brown rascal, you! If it hadn't be'n for
you, me an' Buck might of made a hit with the lady, mightn't we, Buck?
Scratch gravel, now you old reprobate, or we won't get to camp till
midnight."

"Anyway, she ain't no kin to the Wattses," he added reflectively, "not
an' that clean, she ain't."


CHAPTER II

AT THE WATTS RANCH


It was with a decided feeling of depression that Patty Sinclair
approached the Watts ranch. Long before she reached the buildings an
air of shiftless dilapidation was manifest in the ill-lined barbed
wire fences whose rotting posts sagged drunkenly upon loosely strung
wire. A dry weed-choked irrigation ditch paralleled the trail, its
wooden flumes, like the fence posts, rotting where they stood, and its
walls all but obliterated by the wash of spring freshets. The
depression increased as she passed close beside the ramshackle log
stable, where her horse sank to his ankles in a filthy brown seepage
of mud and rotting straw before the door. Two small, slouchily built
stacks of weather-stained hay occupied a fenced-off enclosure, beside
which, with no attempt to protect them from the weather, stood a
dish-wheeled hay rake, and a rusty mowing machine, its cutter-bar
buried in weeds.

Passing through a small clump of cottonwoods, in which three or four
raw-boned horses had taken refuge from the mosquitoes, she came
suddenly upon the ranch house, a squat, dirt-roofed cabin of unpeeled
logs. So, _this_ was the Watts ranch! Again and again in the delirium
that preceded her father's death, he had muttered of Monte's Creek and
the Watts ranch, until she had come to think of it as a place of cool
halls and broad verandahs situated at the head of some wide mountain
valley in which sleek cattle grazed belly-deep in lush grasses.

A rabble of nondescript curs came snapping and yapping about her
horse's legs until dispersed by a harsh command from the dark interior
of the cabin.

"Yere, yo' git out o' thet!"

The dogs slunk away and their places were immediately taken by a
half-dozen ill-kempt, bedraggled children. A tousled head was thrust
from the doorway, and after a moment of inspection a man stepped out
upon the hard-trodden earth of the dooryard. He was bootless and a
great toe protruded from a hole in the point of his sock. He wore a
faded hickory shirt, and the knees of his bleached-out overalls were
patched with blue gingham.

"Howdy," he greeted, in a not unkindly tone, and paused awkwardly
while the protruding toe tried vainly to burrow from sight in the hard
earth.

"Is--is this the Watts ranch?" The girl suppressed a wild desire to
burst into tears.

"Yes, mom, this is hit--what they is of hit." His fingers picked
vaguely at his scraggly beard. An idea seemed suddenly to strike him,
and turning, he thrust his head in at the door. "Ma!" he called,
loudly, and again "Ma! _Ma!_"

The opening of a door within was followed by the sound of a harsh
voice. "Lawzie me, John Watts, what's ailin' yo' now--got a burr in
under yo' gallus?" A tall woman with a broad, kindly face pushed past
the man, wiping suds upon her apron from a pair of very large and very
red hands.

"Sakes alive, if hit hain't a lady! Hain't yo' done tol' her to git
off an' come in? Looks like yer manners, what little yo' ever hed of
'em, fell in the crick an' got drownded. Jest yo' climb right down
offen thet cayuse, dearie, an' come on in the house. John, yo' oncinch
thet saddle, an' then, Horatius Ezek'l, yo' an' David Golieth, taken
the hoss to the barn an' see't he's hayed an' watered 'fore yo' come
back. Microby Dandeline, yo' git a pot o' tea abilin' an' fry up a
bate o' bacon, an' cut some bread, an' warm up the rest o' thet pone,
an' yo', Lillian Russell, yo' finish dryin' them dishes an' set 'em
back on the table. An' Abraham Lincoln Wirt, yo' fetch a pail o'
water, an' wrinch out the worsh dish, an' set a piece o' soap by, an'
a clean towel, an' light up the lamp."

Under Ma Watts's volley of orders, issued without pause for breath,
things began to happen with admirable promptitude.

"Land sakes!" cried the woman, as Patty climbed painfully to the
ground, "hain't yo' that sore an' stiff! Yo' must a-rode clean from
town, an' hits fifty mile, an' yo' not use to ridin' neither, to tell
by the whiteness of yo' face. I'll help yo' git off them hat an'
gloves, an' thar sets the worsh dish on the bench beside the do'.
Microby Dandeline 'll hev a bite for ye d'rec'ly an' I'll fix yo' up a
shake-down. Horatius Ezek'l an' David Golieth kin go out an' crawl in
the hay an' yo' c'n hev theirn." Words flowed from Ma Watts naturally
and continuously without effort, as water flows from a spring. Patty
who had made several unsuccessful attempts to speak, interrupted
abruptly.

"Oh, I couldn't think of depriving the boys of their bed. I----"

"Now, honey, just yo' quit pesterin' 'bout thet. Them young-uns
'druther sleep out'n in, any time. Ef I'd let 'em they'd grow up plumb
wild. When yo've got worshed up come on right in the kitchen an' set
by. Us Wattses is plain folks an' don't pile on no dog. We've et an'
got through, but yo' take all the time yo're a mind to, an' me an'
Microby Dandeline 'll set by an' yo' c'n tell us who yo' be, ef yo're
a mind to, an' ef not hit don't make no difference. We hain't
partic'lar out here, nohow--we've hed preachers an' horse-thieves, an'
never asked no odds of neither. I says to Watts----"

Again the girl made forcible entry into the conversation. "My name is
Sinclair. Patty Sinclair, of Middleton, Connecticut. My father----"

"Land o' love! So yo're Mr. Sinclair's darter! Yo' do favor him a mite
about the eyes, come to look; but yer nose is diff'rnt to hisn, an'
so's yer mouth--must a be'n yer ma's was like that. But sometimes they
don't favor neither one. Take Microby Dandeline, here, 'tain't no one
could say she hain't Watts's, an' Horatius Ezek'l, he favors me, but
fer's the rest of 'em goes, they mightn't b'long to neither one of
us." Microby Dandeline placed the food upon the table and sank, quiet
as a mouse into a chair beneath the glass bracket-lamp with her large
dark eyes fixed upon Patty, who devoured the unappetizing food with an
enthusiasm born of real hunger, while the older woman analyzed volubly
the characteristics, facial and temperamental, of each and several of
the numerous Watts progeny.

Having exhausted the subject of offspring, Ma Watts flashed a direct
question. "How's yer pa, an' where's he at?"

"My father died last month," answered the girl without raising her
eyes from her plate.

"Fer the land sakes, child! I want to know!"

"Watts! Watts!" The lank form appeared in the doorway. "This here's
Mr. Sinclair's darter, an' he's up an' died."

The man's fingers fumbled uncertainly at his beard, as his wife paused
for the intelligence to strike home. "Folks does," he opined,
judiciously after a profound interval.

"That's so, when yo' come to think 'bout hit," admitted Ma Watts.
"What did he die of?"

"Cerebrospinal meningitis."

"My goodness sakes! I should think he would! When my pa died--back in
Tennessee, hit wus, the doctor 'lowed hit wus the eetch, but sho',
he'd hed thet fer hit wus goin' on seven year. 'Bout a week 'fore he
come to die, he got so's 't he couldn't eat nothin', an' he wus thet
het up with the fever he like to burnt up, an' his head ached him fit
to bust, an' he wus out of hit fer four days, an' I mistrust thet-all
mought of hed somethin' to do with his dyin'. The doctor, he come an'
bled him every day, but he died on him, an' then he claimed hit was
the eetch, or mebbe hit wus jest his time hed come, he couldn't tell
which. I've wondered sence if mebbe we'd got a town doctor he mought
of lived. But Doctor Swanky wus a mountain man an' we wus, too, so we
taken him. But, he wus more of a hoss doctor, an' seems like, he never
did hev no luck, much, with folks."

Her nerves all a-jangle from trail-strain and the depressing
atmosphere of the Watts ranch, it seemed to Patty she must shriek
aloud if the woman persisted in her ceaseless gabble.

"Yer pa wus a nice man, an' well thought of. We-all know'd him well.
It wus goin' on three year he prospected 'round here in the hills, an'
many a time he's sot right where yo're settin' now, an' et his meal o'
vittles. Some said las' fall 'fore he went back East how he'd made his
strike, an' hit wus quartz gold, an' how he'd gone back to git money
to work hit. Mr. Bethune thought so, an' Lord Clendenning. They must
of be'n thicker'n thieves with yer pa, 'cordin' to their tell." The
woman paused and eyed the girl inquisitively. "Did he make his strike,
an' why didn't he record hit?"

"I don't know," answered the girl wearily.

"An' don't yo' tell no one ef yo' do know. I b'lieve in folks bein'
close-mouthed. Like I'm allus a-tellin' Watts. But yo' must be plumb
wore out, what with ridin' all day, an' a-tellin' me all about
yo'se'f. I'll slip in an' turn them blankets an' yo' kin jest crawl
right into 'em an' sleep 'til yo' slep' out."

Ma Watts bustled away, and Microby Dandeline began to clear away the
dishes.

"Can't I help?" offered Patty.

The large, wistful eyes regarded her seriously.

"No. I like yo'. Yo' hain't to worsh no dishes. Yo're purty. I like
Mr. Bethune, an' Lord Clendenning, an' that Vil Holland. I like
everybody. Folks is nice, hain't they?"

"Why--yes," agreed Patty, smiling into the big serious eyes. "How old
are you?"

"I'm seventeen, goin' on eighteen. Yo' come to live with us-uns?"

"No--that is--I don't know exactly where I am going to live."

"That Vil Holland, he's got a nice camp, an' 'tain't only him there.
Why don't yo' live there? I want to live there an' I go to his camp on
Gee Dot, but he chases me away, an' sometimes he gits mad."

"What is Gee Dot?" Patty stared in amazement at this girl with the
mind of a child.

"Oh, he's my pony. I reckon Mr. Bethune wouldn't git mad, but I don't
know where he lives."

"I think you had better stay right here," advised Patty, seriously.
"This is your home, you know."

"Yes, but they hain't much room. Me, an' Lillian Russell, an' David
Golieth sleeps on a shake-down, an' they-all shoves an' kicks, an'
sometimes when I want to sleep, Chattenoogy Tennessee sets up a
squarkin' an' I cain't. Babies is a lot of bother. An' they's a lot of
dishes an' chores an' things. Wisht I hed a dress like yo'n!" The girl
passed a timid finger over the fabric of Patty's moleskin riding coat.
Ma Watts appeared in the doorway connecting the two rooms.

"Well, fer the lands sakes! Listen at that! Microby Dandeline Watts,
where's yo' manners?" She turned to Patty. "Don't mind her, she's kind
o' simple, an' don't mean no harm. Yo' shake-down's ready fer yo' an'
I reckon yo' glad, bein' that wore out. Hit's agin the east wall. Jest
go on right in, don't mind Watts. Hit's dark in thar, an' he's rolled
in. We hain't only one bed an' me an' Watts an' the baby sleeps in
hit, on 'tother side the room. Watts, he aims to put up some bunks
when he gits time."

Sick at heart, and too tired and sore of body to protest against any
arrangement that would allow her to sleep the girl murmured her thanks
and crossed to the door of the bedroom. Not at all sure of her
bearings she paused uncertainly in the doorway until a sound of heavy
breathing located the slumbering Watts, and turning toward the
opposite side of the room, proceeded cautiously through the blackness
until her feet came in contact with her "shake-down," which consisted
of a pair of blankets placed upon a hay tick. The odor of the blankets
was anything but fresh, but she sank to the floor, and with much
effort and torturing of strained muscles, succeeded in removing her
boots and jacket and throwing herself upon the bed. Almost at the
moment her head touched the coarse, unslipped pillow, she fell into a
deep sleep, from which hours later she was awakened by an insistent
tap, tap, tap, tap, tap, tap. "Someone has forgotten to pull up the
canoe and the waves are slapping it against the side of the dock," she
thought drowsily. "Did I have it last?" She stirred uneasily and the
pain of movement caused her to gasp. She opened her eyes, and instead
of her great airy chamber in Aunt Rebecca's mansion by the sea, she
was greeted by the sight of the hot, stuffy room of the Watts cabin. A
rumpled pile of blankets was mounded upon the bed against the opposite
wall, and a shake-down similar to her own occupied a space beside the
open door through which hot, bright sunlight streamed.

Several hens pecked assiduously at some crumbs, and Patty realized
that it was the sound of their bills upon the wooden floor that had
awakened her. She succeeded after several painful attempts in pulling
on her boots, and as she rose to her feet, Ma Watts thrust her head in
at the door.

"Lawzie! Honey, did them hens wake yo' up? Sho'! ef I'd a thought o'
thet, I'd o' fed 'em outside, an' yo' could of kep' on sleepin'. 'They
ain't nothin' like a good long sleep when yo' tired,' Watts says, an'
he ort to know. He aims to build a house fer them hens when he gits
time. Yo' know where the worsh dish is, jest make yo'se'f to home,
dinner'll be ready d'rec'ly." The feel of the cold water was grateful
as the girl dashed it over her face and hands from the little tin
wash-basin on the bench beside the door. Watts sat with his chair
resting upon its rear legs and its back against the shady west wall of
the cabin.

"Mo'nin'," he greeted. "Hit's right hot; I be'n studyin' 'bout fixin'
them thar arrigation ditches."

Patty smiled brightly. "All they need is cleaning out, isn't it?"

"Yas, mom. Thet an' riggin' up them flumes. But it's a right smart o'
work, an' then the resevoy's busted, too. I be'n aimin' to fix 'em
when I git time. They hain't had no water in 'em fer three year. Yo'
see, two year ago hit looked like rain mos' every day. Hit didn't rain
none to speak, but hit kep' a body hatin' to start workin' fer fear it
would. An' las' year hit never looked like rain none, so hit wasn't no
use fixin' 'em. An' this year I don't know jest what to do, hit might,
an' then agin hit mightn't. Drat thet sun! Here hit is dinner time.
Seems like hit never lets a body set in one place long 'nough to study
out _whut_ he'd ort to do." Watts rose slowly to his feet, and
picking up his chair, walked deliberately around to the east side of
the house, where he planted it with the precision born of long
practice in the exact spot that the shadow would be longest at the
conclusion of the midday meal.

Patty entered the cabin and a few minutes later the sound of voices
reached her ears. Ma Watts hurried to the window.

"Well, if hit ain't Mr. Bethune an' Lord Clendenning! Ef you see one
you know the other hain't fer off. Hain't he good lookin' though--Mr.
Bethune? Lord hain't so much fer looks, but he's some high up nobility
like over to England where he come from, only over yere they call 'em
remittance men, an' they don't do nothin' much but ride around an'
drink whisky, an' they git paid for hit, too. Folks says how Mr.
Bethune's gran'ma wus a squaw, but I don't believe 'em. Anyways, I
allus like him. He's got manners, an' hit don't stan' to reason no
breed would have manners."

Patty could distinctly see the two riders as they lounged in their
saddles. The larger, whose bulging blue eyes and drooping blond
mustache gave him a peculiar walrus-like expression, she swept at a
glance. The other was talking to Watts and the girl noted the slender
figure with its almost feminine delicacy of mold, and the finely
chiseled features dominated by eyes black as jet--eyes that glowed
with a velvety softness as he spoke.

"We have been looking over your upper pasture," he said. "A fellow
named Schmidt over in the Blackfoot country will be delivering some
horses across the line this summer and he wants to rent some pastures
at different points along the trail. How about it?"

Watts rubbed his beard uncertainly. "Them fences hain't hoss tight. I
be'n studyin' 'bout fixin' 'em."

"Why don't you get at it?"

"Well they's the resevoy, an' the ditches----"

"Never mind the ditches. All that fence needs is a few posts and some
staples."

"My ax hain't fitten to chop with no mo', an' I druv over the spade
an' bruk the handle. I hain't got no luck."

Reaching into his pocket, Bethune withdrew a gold piece which he
tossed to Watts. "Maybe this will change your luck," he smiled. "The
fact is I want that pasture--or, rather, Schultz does."

"Thought yo' said Schmidt."

"Did I? Those kraut names all sound alike to me. But his name is
Schultz. The point is, he'll pay you five dollars a month to hold the
pasture, and five dollars for every day or night he uses it. That ten
spot pays for the first two months. Better buy a new ax and spade and
some staples and get to work. The exercise will do you good, and
Schultz may want to use that pasture in a couple of weeks or so."

"Well, I reckon I kin. Hit's powerful hot fer to work much, but that's
a sight o' money. As I wus sayin' to Mr. Sinclair's darter----"

"Sinclair's daughter! What do you mean? Is Sinclair back?"

Patty noted the sudden flash of the jet black eyes at the mention of
her father's name. It was as though a point of polished steel had
split their velvet softness. Yet there was no hostility in the glance;
rather, it was a gleam of intense interest. The girl's own interest in
the quarter-breed had been casual at most, hardly more than that
accorded by a passing glance until she had chanced to hear him refer
to the man in the Blackfoot country in one breath as Schmidt, and in
the next as Schultz. She wondered at that and so had remained standing
beside Mrs. Watts, screened from the outside by the morning-glory
vines that served as a curtain for the window. The trifling incident
of the changed name was forgotten in the speculation as to why her
father's return to the hill country should be a matter of evident
import to this sagebrush cavalier. So intent had she become that she
hardly noticed the cruel bluntness of Watts's reply.

"He's dead."

"Dead!"

"Yas, he died back East an' his darter's come."

"Does she know he made a strike?" Patty noted the look of eagerness
that accompanied the words.

"I do'no." Watts wagged his head slowly. "Mebbe so; mebbe not."

"Because, if she doesn't," Bethune hastened to add, "she should be
told. Rod Sinclair was one of the best friends I had, and if he has
gone I'm right here to see that his daughter gets a square deal. Of
course if she has the location, she's all right." Patty wondered
whether the man had purposely raised his voice, or was it her
imagination?

Ma Watts had started for the door. "Come on out, honey, an' I'll make
yo' acquainted with Mr. Bethune. He wus a friend of yo' pa, an' Lord
too." As she followed the woman to the door, the girl was conscious of
an indefinable feeling of distrust for the man. Somehow, his words had
not rung true.

As the two women stepped from the house the horsemen swung from their
saddles and stood with uncovered heads.

"This yere's Mr. Sinclair's darter, Mr. Bethune," beamed Ma Watts.
"An' I'd take hit proud ef yo'd all stay to dinner."

"Ah, Miss Sinclair, I am most happy to know you. Permit me to present
my friend Lord Clendenning."

The Englishman bowed low. "The prefix is merely a euphonism Miss
Sinclair. What you really behold in me is the decayed part of a
decaying aristocracy."

Patty laughed. "My goodness, what frankness!"

"Come on, now, an' set by 'fore the vittles gits cold on us. Yere yo'
Horatius Ezek'l an' David Golieth, yo' hay them hosses!"

"No, no! Really, Mrs. Watts, we must not presume on your hospitality.
Important business demands our presence elsewhere."

"Lawzie, Mr. Bethune, there yo' go with them big words agin. Which I
s'pose yo' mean yo' cain't stay. But they's a plenty, an' yo'
welcome." Again Bethune declined and as the woman re-entered the
house, he turned to the girl.

"I only just learned of your father's untimely death. Permit me to
express my sincerest sympathy, and to assure you that if I can be of
service to you in any way I am yours to command."

"Thank you," answered Patty, flushing slightly under the scrutiny of
the black eyes. "I am here to locate my father's claim. I want to do
it alone, but if I can't I shall certainly ask assistance of his
friends."

"Exactly. But, my dear Miss Sinclair, let me warn you. There are men
in these hills who suspected that your father made a strike, who would
stop at nothing to wrest your secret from you." The girl nodded. "I
suppose so. But forewarned is forearmed, isn't it? I thank you."

"Thet Vil Holland wus by yeste'day," said Watts.

Bethune frowned. "What did he want?"

"Didn't want nothin'. Jest come a-ridin' by."

"I should think you'd had enough of him after the way he ran your
sheep man off."

Watts rubbed his beard. "Well, I do'no. The cattlemen pays me same as
that sheep man done. Vil Holland tended to that."

"That isn't the point. What right has Vil Holland and others of his
ilk to tell you, or me, or anybody else who we shall, or shall not
rent to? It is the principle of the thing. The running off of those
sheep was a lawless act, and the sooner lawlessness, as exemplified by
Vil Holland is stamped out of these hills, the better it will be for
the community. He better not try to bulldoze me." Bethune turned to
Patty. "That Vil Holland is the man I had in mind, Miss Sinclair, when
I warned you to choose your friends wisely. He would stop at nothing
to gain an end, even to posing as a friend of your father. In all
probability he will offer to assist you, but if you have any map or
description of your father's location do not under any circumstances
show it to him."

Patty smiled. "If any such paper exists I shall keep it to myself."

Bethune returned the smile. "Good-by," he said. "I shall look forward
to meeting you again. Shall you remain here?"

"I have made no plans," she answered, and as she watched the two
riders disappear down the creek trail her lips twisted into a smile.
"May pose as a friend of your father ... and probably will offer to
assist you;" she repeated under her breath. "Well, Mr. Bethune, I
thank you again for the warning."


CHAPTER III

PATTY GOES TO TOWN


Ma Watts called loudly from the doorway and numerous small Wattses
appeared as if by magic from the direction of the creek and the
cottonwood thicket. Dinner consisted of flabby salt pork, swimming in
its own grease, into which were dipped by means of fingers or forks,
huge misshapen slices of sour white bread. There was also an abundance
of corn pone, black molasses, and a vile concoction that Ma Watts
called coffee. Flies swarmed above the table and settled upon the food
from which they arose in clouds at each repetition of the dipping
process.

How she got through the meal Patty did not know, but to her surprise
and disgust, realized that she had actually consumed a considerable
portion of the unappetizing mess. Watts arose, stretched prodigiously,
and sauntered to his chair which, true to calculation was already just
within the shadow of the east side of the house.

Baby on hip, Ma Watts, assisted by Microby Dandeline and Lillian
Russell, attacked the dishes. All offers of help from Patty were
declined.

"Yo' welcome to stay yere jest as long as yo' want to, honey, an' yo'
hain't got to work none neither. They's a old piece o' stack-cover
somewheres around an' them young-uns kin rig 'em up a tent an' sleep
in hit all summer, an' yo' kin hev their shake-down like yo' done las'
night. I s'pose yo're yere about yo' pa's claim?"

"Yes," answered the girl, "and I certainly appreciate your
hospitality. I hope I can repay you some day, but I cannot think of
settling myself upon you this way. My work will take me out into the
hills and----"

"Jest like yo' pa usta say. He wus that fond o' rale home cookin' thet
he'd come 'long every onct in a month 'er so, an' git him a squr meal,
an' then away he'd go out to his camp."

"Where was his camp?" asked the girl eagerly.

"Lawzie, his camp wus a tent, an' he moved hit around so they couldn't
no one tell from one day to 'nother where he'd be at. But, he never
wus no great ways from here, gen'ally within ten mile, one way er
'nother. Hits out yonder in the barn--his tent an' outfit--pick an'
pan an' shovel an' dishes, all ready to throw onto his pack hoss
which hits a mewl an' runnin' in the hills with them hosses of ourn.
If hit wusn't fer the fences they'd be in the pasture. Watts aims to
fix 'em when he gits time."

"I don't know much about tents, but I guess I'll have to use it, that
is, if there isn't another ranch, or a--a house, or something, where I
can rent a room all to myself."

"Great sakes, child! They hain't another ranch within twenty-five
mile, an' thet's towards town." As if suddenly smitten with an idea,
she paused with her hand full of dishes and called loudly to her
spouse:

"Watts! Watts!"

The chair was eased to its four legs, and the lank form appeared in
the doorway. "Yeh?"

"How about the sheep camp?"

The man's fingers fumbled at his beard and he appeared plunged into
deep thought. "What yo' mean, how 'bout hit?"

"Why not we-all leave Mr. Sinclair's darter live up there?"

Again the thoughtful silence. At length the man spoke: "Why, shore,
she kin stay there long as she likes, an' welcome."

"Hit's a cabin four mile up the crick," explained Ma Watts, "what we
built on our upper desert fer a man thet wanted to run a band o'
sheep. He wus rentin' the range offen us, till they druv him off--the
cattlemen claimed they wouldn't 'low no sheep in the hill country.
They warned him an' pestered him a spell, an' then they jest up an'
druv him off--thet Vil Holland wus into hit, an' some more."

"Who is this Vil Holland you speak of, and why did he want to drive
off the sheep?"

"Oh, he's a cowpuncher--they say they hain't a better cowpuncher in
Montany, when he'll work. But he won't work only when he takes a
notion--'druther hang around the hills an' prospeck. He hain't never
made no strike, but he allus aims to, like all the rest. Ef he'd
settle down, he could draw his forty dollars a month the year 'round,
'stead of which, he works on the round-up, an' gits him a stake, an'
then quits an' strikes out fer the hills."

"I couldn't think of occupying your cabin without paying for it. How
much will you rent it to me for?"

"'Tain't wuth nothin' at all," said Watts. "'Tain't doin' no good
settin' wher' it's at, an' yo' won't hurt hit none a-livin' in hit.
Jest move in, an' welcome."

"No, indeed! Now, you tell me, is ten dollars a month enough rent?"

"Ten dollars a month!" exclaimed Watts. "Why, we-all only got fifteen
fo' a herder an' a dog an' a band o' sheep! No, ef yo' bound to pay,
I'll take two dollars a month. We-all might be po' but we hain't no
robbers."

"I'll take it," said Patty. "And now I'll have to have a lot of things
from town--food and blankets, and furniture, and----"

"Hit's all furnished," broke in Ma Watts. "They's a bunk, an' a table,
an' a stove, an a couple o' wooden chairs."

"Oh, that's fine!" cried the girl, becoming really enthusiastic over
the prospect of having a cabin all her very own. "But, about the other
things: Mr. Watts can you haul them from town?"

Watts tugged at his beard and stared out across the hills. "Yes, mom,
I reckon I kin. Le's see, the work's a-pilin' up on me right smart."
He cast his eye skyward, where the sun shone hot from the cloudless
blue. "Hit mought rain to-morrow, an' hit moughtn't. The front ex on
the wagon needs fixin'--le's see, this here's a Wednesday. How'd next
Sunday, a week do?"

The girl stared at him in dismay. Ten days of Ma Watts's "home
cooking" loomed before her.

"Oh, couldn't you _possibly_ go before that?" she pleaded.

"Well, there's them fences. I'd orter hev' time to study 'bout how
many steeples hit's a-goin' to tak' to fix 'em. An' besides, Ferd Rowe
'lowed he wus comin' 'long some day to trade hosses an' I'd hate to
miss him."

"Why can't I go to town. I know the way. Will you rent me your horses
and wagon? I can drive and I can bring out your tools and things,
too." As she awaited Watts's reply her eyes met the wistful gaze of
Microby Dandeline. She turned to Ma Watts. "And maybe you would let
Microby Dandeline go with me. It would be loads of fun."

"Lawzie, honey, yo' wouldn't want to be pestered with her."

"Yes, I would really. Please let her go with me, that is, if Mr. Watts
will let me have the team."

"Why, shore, yo' welcome to 'em. They hain't sich a good span o'
hosses, but they'll git yo' there, an' back, give 'em time."

"And can we start in the morning?"

"My! Yo' in a sight o' hurry. They's thet front ex----"

"Is it anything very serious? Maybe I could help fix it. Do let me
try."

Watts rubbed his beard reflectively. "Well, no, I reckon it's mebbe
the wheels needs greasin'. 'Twouldn't take no sight o' time to do, if
a body could only git at hit. Reckon I mought grease 'em all 'round,
onct I git started. The young-uns kin help, yo' jest stay here with
Ma. Ef yo' so plumb sot on goin' we'll see't yo' git off."

"I kin go, cain't I, Ma?" Microby Dandeline's eyes were big with
excitement, as she wrung out her dish towel and hung it to dry in the
sun.

"Why, yas, I reckon yo' mought's well--but seem's like yo' allus
a-wantin' to gad. Yo' be'n to town twict a'ready."

"Twice!" cried Patty. "In how long?"

"She's goin' on eighteen. Four years, come July she wus to town. They
wus a circust."

"I know Mr. Christie. He lives to town."

"He's the preacher. He's a 'piscopalium preacher, an' one time that
Vil Holland an' him come ridin' 'long, an' they stopped in fer dinner,
an' that Vil Holland, he's allus up to some kind o' devilment er
'nother, he says: 'Ma Watts, why don't yo' hev the kids all
babitized?' I hadn't never thought much 'bout hit, but thar wus the
preacher, an' he seemed to think mighty proud of hit, an' hit didn't
cost nothin', so I tol' him to go ahead. He started in on Microby
Dandeline--we jest called her Dandeline furst, bein' thet yallar with
janders when she wus a baby, but when she got about two year, I wus a
readin' a piece in a paper a man left, 'bout these yere little
microbys thet gits into everywheres they shouldn't ort to, jest like
she done, so I says to Watts how she'd ort to had two names anyways,
only I couldn't think of none but common ones when we give her hern. I
says, we'll name her Microby Dandeline Watts an' Watts, he didn't care
one way er t'other." Ma Watts shifted the baby to the other hip.
"Babitizin' is nice, but hit works both ways, too. Take the baby,
yere. When we'd got down to the bottom of the batch it come her turn,
an', lawzie, I wus that flustered, comin' so sudden, thet way, I
couldn't think of no name fer her 'cept Chattenoogy Tennessee, where I
come from near, an' the very nex' day I wus readin' in the almanac an'
I found one I liked better. Watts, he hain't no help to a body, he
hain't no aggucation to speak of, an' don't never read none, an'
would as soon I'd name his children John, like his ma done him. As I
was sayin' there hit wus in the almanac the name 'twould of fitten the
baby to a T. Vernal Esquimaux, hit said, March 21, 5:26 A.M. The baby
was borned March the 21st, 'tween five an' six in the mornin'. Nex'
time I wus to town I hunted up preacher Christie, but he said he
couldn't onbabitize her, an' he reckoned Chatenoogy Tennessee wus as
good as Vernal Esquimaux, anyhow, an' we could save Vernal Esquimaux
fer the next one--jest's ef yo' could hev 'em like a time table!"

The afternoon was assiduously devoted to overhauling the contents of a
huge tin trunk in an effort to find a frock suitable for the momentous
occasion of Microby Dandeline's journey. The one that had served for
the previous visit, a tight little affair of pink gingham, proved
entirely inadequate in its important dimensions, and automatically
became the property of the younger and smaller Lillian Russell.
Patty's suggestion of a simple white lawn that reposed upon the very
bottom of the trunk was overruled in favor of a betucked and
beflounced creation of red calico in which Ma Watts had beamed upon
the gay panoply of the long remembered "circust." An hour's work with
scissors and needle reduced the dress to approximately the required
size. When the task was completed Watts appeared with the information
that he reckoned the wagon would run, and that the "young-uns" were
out in the hills hunting the "hosses."

At early dawn the following morning Patty was awakened by a timid hand
upon her shoulder.

"Hit's daylight, an' Pa's hitchin' up the hosses." Arrayed in the red
dress, her eyes round with excitement and anticipation, Microby
Dandeline was bending over her whispering excitedly, "An' breakfus's
ready, an' me an' Ma's got the lunch putten up, an' hit's a pow'ful
long ways to town, an' we better git a-goin'."

"Stay right clost an' don't go gittin' lost," admonished Ma watts, as
she stood in the doorway and surveyed her daughter with approval born
of motherly pride. The pink gingham sunbonnet that matched the tight
little dress had required only a slight "letting out" to make it "do,"
and taken in conjunction with the flaming red dress, made a study in
color that would have delighted the heart of a Gros Ventre squaw.
Thick, home-knit stockings, and a pair of stiff cow-hide shoes
completed the costume, and made Microby Dandeline the center of an
admiring semi-circle of Wattses.

"Yo' shore look right pert an' briggity, darter," admitted Watts.
"Don't yo' give the lady no trouble, keep offen the railroad car
tracks, an' don't go talkin' to strangers yo' don't know, an' ef yo'
see preacher Christie tell him howdy, an' how's he gittin' 'long, an'
we're doin' the same, an' stop in nex' time he's out in the hills." He
handed Patty the reins. "An' mom, yo' won't fergit them steeples, an'
a ax, an' a spade?"

"I won't forget," Patty assured him, and as Microby Dandeline was
saying good-by to the small brothers and sisters, the man leaned
closer. "Ef they's any change left over I wisht yo'd give her about
ten cents to spend jest as she pleases."

The girl nodded, and as Microby Dandeline scrambled up over the wheel
and settled herself beside her upon the board that served as a seat,
she called a cheery good-by, and clucked to the horses.

The trail down Monte's Creek was a fearsome road that sidled
dangerously along narrow rock ledges, and plunged by steep pitches
into the creek bed and out again. Partly by sheer luck, partly by
bits of really skillful driving, but mostly because the horses,
themselves knew every foot of the tortuous trail, the descent of the
creek was made without serious mishap. Well, General, what's the first
move?

CANYNGE. [Lifting his eyebrows] Mr De Levis presses the matter?

DE Levis. [Flicked again] Unless you think it's too plebeian of me,
General Canynge--a thousand pounds.

CANYNGE. [Drily] Just so! Then we must wait for the police, WINSOR.
Lady Adela has got through to them. What height are these rooms from
the ground, Treisure?

TREISURE.

Twenty-three feet from the terrace, sir.

CANYNGE. Any ladders near?

TREISURE. One in the stables, Sir, very heavy. No others within three
hundred yards.

CANYNGE. Just slip down, and see whether that's been moved.

TREISURE. Very good, General.

[He goes out.]

DE LEVIS.

[Uneasily] Of course, he--I suppose you--
WINSOR. We do.

CANYNGE. You had better leave this in our hands, De Levis.

DE LEVIS. Certainly; only, the way he--
WINSOR. [Curtly] Treisure has been here since he was a boy. I should
as soon suspect myself.

DE LEVIS. [Looking from one to the other--with sudden anger] You seem
to think--! What was I to do? Take it lying down and let whoever it
is get clear off? I suppose it's natural to want my money back?

CANYNGE looks at his nails; WINSOR out of the window.

WINSOR. [Turning] Of course, De Levis!

DE LEVIS. [Sullenly] Well, I'll go to my room. When the police come,
perhaps you'll let me know. He goes out.

WINSOR. Phew! Did you ever see such a dressing-gown?

The door is opened. LADY ADELA and MARGARET ORME come in. The latter is
a vivid young lady of about twenty-five in a vivid wrapper; she is
smoking a cigarette.

LADY A. I've told the Dancys--she was in bed. And I got through to
Newmarket, Charles, and Inspector Dede is coming like the wind on a
motor cycle.

MARGARET. Did he say "like the wind," Adela?

He must have imagination.

Isn't this gorgeous? Poor little Ferdy!

WINSOR.

[Vexed] You might take it seriously, Margaret; it's pretty beastly
for us all.

What time did you come up?

MARGARET.

I came up with Adela. Am I suspected, Charles? How thrilling!

WINSOR. Did you hear anything?

MARGARET. Only little Ferdy splashing.

WINSOR. And saw nothing?

MARGARET. Not even that, alas!

LADY A. [With a finger held up] Leste! Un peu leste! Oh! Here are the
Dancys. Come in, you two!

MABEL and RONALD DANCY enter. She is a pretty young woman with bobbed
hair, fortunately, for she has just got out of bed, and is in her
nightgown and a wrapper.

DANCY is in his smoking jacket. He has a pale, determined face with
high cheekbones, small, deep-set dark eyes, reddish crisp hair,
and looks like a horseman.

WINSOR. Awfully sorry to disturb you, Mrs Dancy; but I suppose you
and Ronny haven't heard anything.

De Levis's room is just beyond Ronny's dressing-room, you know.

MABEL. I've been asleep nearly half an hour, and Ronny's only just
come up.

CANYNGE. Did you happen to look out of your window, Mrs Dancy?

MABEL. Yes. I stood there quite five minutes.

CANYNGE. When?

MABEL.

Just about eleven, I should think. It was raining hard then.

CANYNGE. Yes, it's just stopped.

You saw nothing?

MABEL. No.

DANCY. What time does he say the money was taken?

WINSOR. Between the quarter and half past. He'd locked his door
and had the key with him.

MARGARET. How quaint! Just like an hotel. Does he put his boots
out?

LADY A.

    Don't be so naughty, Meg.
    

CANYNGE. When exactly did you come up, Dance?

DANCY. About ten minutes ago. I'd only just got into my dressing-room
before Lady Adela came. I've been writing letters in the hall
since Colford and I finished billiards.

CANYNGE. You weren't up for anything in between?

DANCY. No.

MARGARET. The mystery of the grey room.

DANCY. Oughtn't the grounds to be searched for footmarks?

CANYNGE. That's for the police.

DANCY. The deuce! Are they coming?

CANYNGE. Directly. [A knock] Yes?

TREISURE enters.

Well?

TREISURE.

The ladder has not been moved, General. There isn't a sign.

WINSOR. All right. Get Robert up, but don't say anything to
him. By the way, we're expecting the police.

TREISURE. I trust they will not find a mare's nest, sir, if I may
say so.

He goes.

WINSOR. De Levis has got wrong with Treisure. [Suddenly] But, I say,
what would any of us have done if we'd been in his shoes?

MARGARET. A thousand pounds? I can't even conceive having it.

DANCY. We probably shouldn't have found it out.

LADY A. No--but if we had.

DANCY. Come to you--as he did.

WINSOR. Yes; but there's a way of doing things.

CANYNGE. We shouldn't have wanted the police.

MARGARET. No. That's it. The hotel touch.

LADY A. Poor young man; I think we're rather hard on him.

WINSOR. He sold that weed you gave him, Dancy, to Kentman, the bookie,
and these were the proceeds.

DANCY. Oh!

WINSOR. He'd tried her high, he said.

DANCY. [Grimly] He would.

MABEL. Oh! Ronny, what bad luck!

WINSOR. He must have been followed here. [At the window] After rain
like that, there ought to be footmarks.

The splutter of a motor cycle is heard.

MARGARET. Here's the wind!

WINSOR. What's the move now, General?

CANYNGE. You and I had better see the Inspector in De Levis's room,
WINSOR. [To the others] If you'll all be handy, in case he wants to
put questions for himself.

MARGARET. I hope he'll want me; it's just too thrilling.

DANCY. I hope he won't want me; I'm dog-tired. Come on, Mabel.

[He puts his arm in his wife's].

CANYNGE. Just a minute, Charles.

He draws dose to WINSOR as the others are departing to their rooms.

WINSOR. Yes, General?

CANYNGE. We must be careful with this Inspector fellow. If he pitches
hastily on somebody in the house it'll be very disagreeable.

WINSOR. By Jove! It will.

CANYNGE. We don't want to rouse any ridiculous suspicion.

WINSOR. Quite. [A knock] Come in!

TREISURE enters.

TREISURE. Inspector Dede, Sir.

WINSOR. Show him in.

TREISURE.

Robert is in readiness, sir; but I could swear he knows nothing about
it.

WINSOR. All right.

TREISURE re-opens the door, and says "Come in, please." The INSPECTOR
enters, blue, formal, moustachioed, with a peaked cap in his
hand.

WINSOR. Good evening, Inspector. Sorry to have brought you out at this
time of night.

INSPECTOR. Good evenin', sir. Mr WINSOR? You're the owner here, I
think?

WINSOR. Yes. General Canynge.

INSPECTOR. Good evenin', General. I understand, a large sum of
money?

WINSOR. Yes. Shall we go straight to the room it was taken from? One
of my guests, Mr De Levis. It's the third room on the left.

CANYNGE. We've not been in there yet, Inspector; in fact, we've done
nothing, except to find out that the stable ladder has not been
moved.
We haven't even searched the grounds.

INSPECTOR. Right, sir; I've brought a man with me.

They go out.

CURTAIN. And interval of a Minute.

SCENE II

[The same set is used for this Scene, with the different arrangement
of furniture, as specified.]
The bedroom of DE LEVIS is the same in shape as WINSOR'S dressing-room,
except that there is only one door--to the corridor.

       The furniture, however, is differently arranged; a small four-poster
bedstead stands against the wall, Right Back, jutting into the room.

A chair, on which DE LEVIS's clothes are thrown, stands at its foot.
There is a dressing-table against the wall to the left of the
open windows, where the curtains are drawn back and a stone balcony
is seen.

Against the wall to the right of the window is a chest of
drawers, and a washstand is against the wall, Left. On a small table
to the right of the bed an electric reading lamp is turned up,
and there is a light over the dressing-table.

The INSPECTOR is standing plumb centre looking at the bed, and DE
LEVIS by the back of the chair at the foot of the bed. WINSOR and
CANYNGE are close to the door, Right Forward.

INSPECTOR. [Finishing a note] Now, sir, if this is the room as you left
it for your bath, just show us exactly what you did after takin' the
pocket-book from the suit case. Where was that, by the way?

DE LEVIS. [Pointing] Where it is now--under the dressing-table.

He comes forward to the front of the chair, opens the pocket-book,
goes through the pretence of counting his shaving papers, closes
the pocket-book, takes it to the head of the bed and slips it under
the pillow.

Makes the motion of taking up his pyjamas, crosses below the INSPECTOR
to the washstand, takes up a bath sponge, crosses to the door, takes
out the key, opens the door.

INSPECTOR. [Writing]. We now have the room as it was when the theft
was committed. Reconstruct accordin' to 'uman nature,
gentlemen--assumin' the thief to be in the room, what would he
try first?--the clothes, the dressin'-table, the suit case, the
chest of drawers, and last the bed.

He moves accordingly, examining the glass on the dressing-table, the
surface of the suit cases, and the handles of the drawers, with a
spy-glass, for finger-marks.

CANYNGE. [Sotto voce to WINSOR] The order would have been just the
other way.

The INSPECTOR goes on hands and knees and examines the carpet between
the window and the bed.

DE LEVIS. Can I come in again?

INSPECTOR. [Standing up] Did you open the window, sir, or was it open
when you first came in?

DE LEVIS. I opened it.

INSPECTOR. Drawin' the curtains back first?

DE LEVIS. Yes.

INSPECTOR.

[Sharply] Are you sure there was nobody in the room already?

DE LEVIS. [Taken aback] I don't know. I never thought. I didn't look
under the bed, if you mean that.

INSPECTOR. [Jotting] Did not look under bed. Did you look under it
after the theft?

DE LEVIS. No. I didn't.

INSPECTOR. Ah! Now, what did you do after you came back from your
bath?
Just give us that precisely.

DE LEVIS. Locked the door and left the key in. Put back my sponge, and
took off my dressing-gown and put it there.

[He points to the footrails of the bed] Then I drew the curtains,
again.

INSPECTOR. Shutting the window?

DE LEVIS. No.

I got into bed, felt for my watch to see the time.

My hand struck the pocket-book, and somehow it felt thinner.

I took it out, looked into it, and found the notes gone, and these
shaving papers instead.

INSPECTOR. Let me have a look at those, sir.

[He applies the spy-glasses] And then?

DE LEVIS. I think I just sat on the bed.

INSPECTOR.

Thinkin' and cursin' a bit, I suppose. Ye-es?

DE LEVIS. Then I put on my dressing-gown and went straight to Mr
WINSOR.

INSPECTOR. Not lockin' the door?

DE LEVIS. No.

INSPECTOR.

Exactly.

[With a certain finality] Now, sir, what time did you come up?

DE LEVIS. About eleven.

INSPECTOR. Precise, if you can give it me.

DE LEVIS. Well, I know it was eleven-fifteen when I put my watch
under my pillow, before I went to the bath, and I suppose I'd been about
a quarter of an hour undressing. I should say after eleven, if
anything.

INSPECTOR. Just undressin'? Didn't look over your bettin' book?
DE LEVIS. No.

INSPECTOR. No prayers or anything?
DE LEVIS. No.
INSPECTOR. Pretty slippy with your undressin' as a rule?
DE LEVIS. Yes. Say five past eleven.
INSPECTOR. Mr WINSOR, what time did the gentleman come to you?
WINSOR. Half-past eleven.

INSPECTOR. How do you fix that, sir?
WINSOR. I'd just looked at the time, and told my wife to send her
maid off.
INSPECTOR. Then we've got it fixed between 11.15 and 11.30. [Jots]
Now, sir, before we go further I'd like to see your butler and the
footman that valets this gentleman.
WINSOR. [With distaste] Very well, Inspector; only--my butler has
been with us from a boy.
INSPECTOR. Quite so. This is just clearing the ground, sir.
WINSOR. General, d'you mind touching that bell?
CANYNGE rings a bell by the bed.
INSPECTOR. Well, gentlemen, there are four possibilities. Either
the thief was here all the time, waiting under the bed, and slipped
out after this gentleman had gone to Mr WINSOR. Or he came in with
a key that fits the lock; and I'll want to see all the keys in the
house. Or he came in with a skeleton key and out by the window,
probably droppin' from the balcony. Or he came in by the window
with a rope or ladder and out the same way. [Pointing] There's a
footmark here from a big boot which has been out of doors since it
rained.
CANYNGE. Inspector--you er--walked up to the window when you first
came into the room.
INSPECTOR. [Stiffly] I had not overlooked that, General.
CANYNGE. Of course.
A knock on the door relieves a certain tension,
WINSOR. Come in.
The footman ROBERT, a fresh-faced young man, enters, followed by
TREISURE.

INSPECTOR. You valet Mr--Mr De Levis, I think?
ROBERT. Yes, sir.
INSPECTOR. At what time did you take his clothes and boots?
ROBERT. Ten o'clock, sir.
INSPECTOR. [With a pounce] Did you happen to look under his
bed?

ROBERT. No, sir.
INSPECTOR. Did you come up again, to bring the clothes back?
ROBERT. No, sir; they're still downstairs.
INSPECTOR. Did you come up again for anything?
ROBERT. No, Sir.

INSPECTOR. What time did you go to bed?
ROBERT. Just after eleven, Sir.
INSPECTOR. [Scrutinising him] Now, be careful. Did you go to bed
at all?

ROBERT. No, Sir.
INSPECTOR. Then why did you say you did? There's been a theft here,
and anything you say may be used against you.
ROBERT. Yes, Sir. I meant, I went to my room.
INSPECTOR. Where is your room?
ROBERT. On the ground floor, at the other end of the right wing,
sir.
WINSOR. It's the extreme end of the house from this, Inspector.
He's with the other two footmen.
INSPECTOR. Were you there alone?
ROBERT. No, Sir. Thomas and Frederick was there too.
TREISURE. That's right; I've seen them.
INSPECTOR. [Holding up his hand for silence] Were you out of the
room again after you went in?

ROBERT. No, Sir.
INSPECTOR. What were you doing, if you didn't go to bed?
ROBERT. [To WINSOR] Beggin' your pardon, Sir, we were playin'
Bridge.
INSPECTOR. Very good. You can go. I'll see them later on.
ROBERT. Yes, Sir. They'll say the same as me. He goes out, leaving
a smile on the face of all except the INSPECTOR and DE LEVIS.
INSPECTOR. [Sharply] Call him back.
TREISURE calls "Robert," and the FOOTMAN re-enters.
ROBERT. Yes, Sir?
INSPECTOR. Did you notice anything particular about Mr De Levis's
clothes?

ROBERT. Only that they were very good, Sir.
INSPECTOR. I mean--anything peculiar?
ROBERT. [After reflection] Yes, Sir.

INSPECTOR. Well?
ROBERT. A pair of his boots this evenin' was reduced to one,
sir.

INSPECTOR. What did you make of that?
ROBERT. I thought he might have thrown the other at a cat or
something.

INSPECTOR. Did you look for it?
ROBERT. No, Sir; I meant to draw his attention to it in the
morning.

INSPECTOR. Very good.
ROBERT. Yes, Sir. [He goes again.]
INSPECTOR. [Looking at DE LEVIS] Well, sir, there's your story
corroborated.
DE LEVIS. [Stifly] I don't know why it should need corroboration,
Inspector.
INSPECTOR. In my experience, you can never have too much of that.
[To WINSOR] I understand there's a lady in the room on this side
[pointing Left] and a gentleman on this [pointing Right] Were they
in their rooms?

WINSOR. Miss Orme was; Captain Dancy not.
INSPECTOR. Do they know of the affair?

WINSOR. Yes.
INSPECTOR. Well, I'd just like the keys of their doors for a minute.
My man will get them.
He goes to the door, opens it, and speaks to a constable in the
corridor.

[To TREISURE] You can go with him.

TREISURE goes Out.
In the meantime I'll just examine the balcony.
He goes out on the balcony, followed by DE LEVIS.
WINSOR. [To CANYNGE] Damn De Levis and his money! It's deuced
invidious, all this, General.
CANYNGE. The Inspector's no earthly.
There is a simultaneous re-entry of the INSPECTOR from the balcony
and of TREISURE and the CONSTABLE from the corridor.
CONSTABLE. [Handing key] Room on the left, Sir. [Handing key] Room
on the right, sir.
The INSPECTOR tries the keys in the door, watched with tension by
the others. The keys fail.

INSPECTOR. Put them back.
Hands keys to CONSTABLE, who goes out, followed by TREISURE.
I'll have to try every key in the house, sir.
WINSOR. Inspector, do you really think it necessary to disturb the
whole house and knock up all my guests? It's most disagreeable, all
this, you know. The loss of the money is not such a great matter.
Mr De Levis has a very large income.
CANYNGE. You could get the numbers of the notes from Kentman the
bookmaker, Inspector; he'll probably have the big ones, anyway.
INSPECTOR. [Shaking his head] A bookie. I don't suppose he will,
sir.
It's come and go with them, all the time.
WINSOR. We don't want a Meldon Court scandal, Inspector.
INSPECTOR. Well, Mr WINSOR, I've formed my theory.
As he speaks, DE LEVIS comes in from the balcony.
And I don't say to try the keys is necessary to it; but strictly,
I ought to exhaust the possibilities.
WINSOR. What do you say, De Levis? D'you want everybody in the house
knocked up so that their keys can be tried?
DE LEVIS. [Whose face, since his return, expresses a curious
excitement] No, I don't.
INSPECTOR. Very well, gentlemen. In my opinion the thief walked in
before the door was locked, probably during dinner; and was under
the bed. He escaped by dropping from the balcony--the creeper at
that corner [he points stage Left] has been violently wrenched.
I'll go down now, and examine the grounds, and I'll see you again
Sir. [He makes another entry in his note-book] Goodnight, then,
gentlemen!

CANYNGE. Good-night!
WINSOR. [With relief] I'll come with you, Inspector.
He escorts him to the door, and they go out.
DE LEVIS. [Suddenly] General, I know who took them.
CANYNGE. The deuce you do! Are you following the Inspector's
theory?
DE LEVIS. [Contemptuously] That ass! [Pulling the shaving papers
out of the case] No! The man who put those there was clever and
cool enough to wrench that creeper off the balcony, as a blind.
Come and look here, General. [He goes to the window; the GENERAL
follows. DE LEVIS points stage Right] See the rail of my balcony,
and the rail of the next? [He holds up the cord of his dressing-gown,
stretching his arms out] I've measured it with this. Just over seven
feet, that's all! If a man can take a standing jump on to a narrow
bookcase four feet high and balance there, he'd make nothing of
that. And, look here! [He goes out on the balcony and returns with
a bit of broken creeper in his hand, and holds it out into the
light] Someone's stood on that--the stalk's crushed--the inner
corner too, where he'd naturally stand when he took his jump
back.
CANYNGE. [After examining it--stiffly] That other balcony is young
Dancy's, Mr De Levis; a soldier and a gentleman. This is an
extraordinary insinuation.

DE LEVIS. Accusation.

CANYNGE. What!
DE LEVIS. I have intuitions, General; it's in my blood. I see the
whole thing. Dancy came up, watched me into the bathroom, tried my
door, slipped back into his dressing-room, saw my window was open,
took that jump, sneaked the notes, filled the case up with these,
wrenched the creeper there [He points stage Left] for a blind,
jumped back, and slipped downstairs again. It didn't take him four
minutes altogether.
CANYNGE. [Very gravely] This is outrageous, De Levis. Dancy says
he was downstairs all the time. You must either withdraw unreservedly,
or I must confront you with him.
DE LEVIS. If he'll return the notes and apologise, I'll do nothing--
except cut him in future. He gave me that filly, you know, as a
hopeless weed, and he's been pretty sick ever since, that he was
such a flat as not to see how good she was. Besides, he's hard up,
I know.
CANYNGE. [After a vexed turn up and down the room] It's mad, sir,
to jump to conclusions like this.
DE LEVIS. Not so mad as the conclusion Dancy jumped to when he
lighted on my balcony."Yes," answered the man. He spoke quietly, but there was that in his
voice that caused the other to glance at him sharply. "You can stand
up."

The man complied without taking his eyes from the cowboy's face.

"I happened to be goin' by an' thought I'd stop an' see if I could
take the team over to the livery barn for my--neighbors, yonder. The
door bein' open, I couldn't help hearin' what you said." He paused,
and the proprietor grinned.

"Business is business, an' a man's into it fer all he kin git."

"I suppose that's so. I suppose it's good business to lie an' cheat
women, an'----"

"I hain't lied, an' I hain't cheated no one. An' what business is it
of yourn if I did? All my rooms is full up, an' the help's all gone to
the pitcher show."

"An' there's about a dozen or so cowmen stoppin' here to-night--the
ones you talked of payin' to double up--an' there ain't one of 'em
that wouldn't be glad to double up, or go out an' sleep on the street
if he couldn't get nowhere else to sleep, if you even whispered that
there was a lady needed his room. The boys is right touchy when it
comes to bein' lied about."

The proprietor's face became suddenly serious. "Aw looky here, Vil, I
didn't know these parties was friends of yourn. I'll see't they gits
'em a room, an' I expect I kin dig 'em out some cold meat an'
trimmin's. I was only kiddin'. Can't you take a joke?"

"Yes, I can take a joke. I'm only kiddin', too--an' so'll the boys be,
after I tell 'em----"

"They hain't no use rilin' the boys up. I----"

"An' about that supper," continued the cowboy, ignoring the protest,
"I guess that cold meat'll keep over. What these ladies needs is a
good hot supper. Plenty of ham _and_, hot Java, potatoes, an' whatever
you got."

"But the help's----"

"Get it yourself, then. It ain't so long since you was runnin' a short
order dump. You ain't forgot how to get up a quick feed, an' to give
the devil his due, a pretty good one."

The other started surlily toward the rear. "I'll do it, if----"

"You won't do it _if_ nothin'. You'll do it--that's all. An' you'll
do it at the regular price, too."

"Say, who's runnin' this here _hotel_?"

"You're runnin' it, an' I'm tellin you how," answered the tall
hillman, without taking his eyes from the other's face.

The man disappeared, muttering incoherently, and Vil Holland turned to
the door.

"I want to thank you," ventured Patty. "Evidently your word carries
weight with mine host."

"It better," replied the cowpuncher, dryly. "An' you're welcome. I'll
take the team across to the livery barn." He spoke impersonally, with
scarcely a glance in her direction, and as the screen door banged
behind him the girl flushed, remembering her own rudeness upon the
trail.

"Lawless he may be, and he certainly looks and acts the part," she
murmured to herself as the wagon rattled away from the sidewalk, "but
his propensity for turning up at the right time and the right place is
rapidly becoming a matter of habit." A door beside the desk stood
ajar, and above it, Patty read the words "WASH ROOM." Pushing it open
she glanced into the interior which was dimly lighted by a murky oil
lamp that occupied a sagging bracket beside a distorted mirror. Two
tin wash basins occupied a sink-like contrivance above which a single
iron faucet protruded from the wall. Beside the faucet was tacked a
broad piece of wrapping paper upon which were printed in a laborious
scrawl the following appeals:

             NOTISS

Ples DoNT LEEv THE WaTTer RUN ITS hAN
Pumpt.
PLes DONT Waist THE ToWL.
Kome AN BREsh AN TOOTH BResH IS INto
THR Rak BESIDS THE MiRRoW.  PLeS PUT
EM baCK.
THes IS hoUSE RULes AN WANts TO be OBayD
KINLY.

                           F. RuMMEL, PROP.

Removing the trail dust from their faces and hands, the girls returned
to the office and after an interminable wait the proprietor appeared,
red-faced and surly. "Grub's on, an' yer room'll be ready agin you've
et," he growled, and waddled to his place at the window.

A generous supply of ham and eggs, fried potatoes, bread and butter,
and hot coffee awaited them in the dining-room, and it seemed to Patty
that never before had food tasted so good. Twenty minutes later, when
they returned to the office the landlord indicated the stairway with a
jerk of his thumb. "First door to the right from the top of the
stairs, lamp's lit, extry blankets in the closet, breakfast from five
'till half-past-seven." The words rattled from his lips in a single
breath as he sat staring into the outer darkness.

"If Aunt Rebecca could see me, now," smiled Patty to herself, as she
led the way up the uncarpeted stairs, with Microby Dandeline's
cow-hide boots clattering noisily in her wake.


CHAPTER V

SHEEP CAMP


If Patty Sinclair had anticipated annoyance from the forced attention
of her tall horseman of the hills, she was disappointed, for neither
at meals, nor during the shopping tour that occupied the whole of the
following day, nor yet upon the long homeward drive, did he appear.
The return trip was slower and more monotonous even than the journey
to town. The horses crawled along the interminable treeless trail with
the heavily loaded wagon bumping and rattling in the choking cloud of
its own dust.

The expedition had been a disappointing one to Microby. The "pitcher
show" did not compare in interest with the never forgotten "circust."
There had been no "fight" to break the monotony of purchasing
supplies. And they had encountered no "nortymobiles."

Despite the fact that they had started from town at daylight,
darkness overtook them at the canyon and it was with fear and
misgiving that Patty contemplated the devious trail up Monte's Creek.
The descent of this trail by daylight had taxed the girl's knowledge
of horsemanship to the limit, and now to attempt its ascent with a
heavily loaded wagon in the darkness--Microby Dandeline seemed to read
her thoughts.

"We-all cain't git up the crick, I don't reckon," she hazarded, but
even as she spoke there was a flicker of light flashed through the
darkness and, lantern in hand, Watts rose from his comfortable seat in
a niche of rock near the fork of the trail and greeted them with his
kindly drawl. "I 'lowed yo' all ort to be 'long d'rec'ly. I'll take
'em now, Miss; the trail's kind of roughish like, but ef yo'll jist
take the lantern an' foller 'long ahead I reckon we'll make hit all
right. I've druv hit afore in the dark, an' no lantern, neither."
Taking turns with the lantern, the girls led the way, and an hour and
a half later halted before the door of the Watts cabin, where they
became the center of an admiring group of young Wattses who munched
their candy soberly as they gazed in reverent awe at the homing
argonauts.

The three mile walk up the rough trail did wonders for Patty's
stiffened muscles, and it was with a feeling of agreeable surprise
that she rose from her shake-down the following morning with scarcely
an ache or a pain in her body.

"Yer gittin' bruk in to hit," smiled Ma Watts, approvingly, as the
girl sat down to her belated breakfast. But the surprise at her fit
condition was nothing to the surprise of Ma Watts's next words. "Pa,
he taken yer stuff on up to the sheep camp. He 'lowed yo'd want to git
settled like. They taken yer pa's outfit along, too, an' when they git
yo' onloaded they're a-goin' to work on the upper pasture fence. When
Pa gits sot on a thing he goes right ahead an' does hit. Some thinks
he's lazy, but hit hain't thet. He's easy goin'--all the Wattses
wus--but when they git sot on a thing all kingdom come cain't stop 'em
a-doin' hit. Trouble with Pa is he's got sot on settin'." Ma Watts
talked on and on, and at the conclusion of the meal Patty drew a bill
from her purse. But the woman would have none of it. "No siree, we-all
hain't a-runnin' no _hotel_. Folks is welcome to come when they like
an' stay as long as they want to, an' we're glad to hev 'em. Yer
cayuse is a-waitin' out yender. The boys saddled him up fer yo'. Come
down an' take pot luck whenever yo're a mind. Microby Dandeline, she
ketched up Gee Dot an' went a-taggin' 'long fer to help yo' git
settled. Ef she gits in the way jist send her home. Foller up the
crick," she called, as Patty mounted her horse. "Yo' cain't miss the
sheep camp, hit's about a mild 'bove the upper pasture."

Watts and the boys were just finishing the unloading of her supplies
when Patty slipped from her horse and surveyed the little cabin with
its dark background of pines.

"Hit hain't so big as some," apologized the man, as he climbed into
the wagon and gathered up the reins. "But the chinkin's tol'ble, an'
the roof's middlin' tight 'cept a couple places wher' it leaks."

The girl's glance strayed from the little log building to the untidy
litter of rusty tin cans and broken bottles that ornamented its
dooryard, and the warped and broken panels of the abandoned corral
that showed upon the weed-choked flat across the creek. Stepping to
the door, she peered into the interior where Microby was industriously
sweeping the musty hay from the bunk with the brand-new broom. Thumbed
and torn magazines littered the floor, a few discarded garments hung
dejectedly from nails driven into the wall, while from the sagging
door of the rough board cupboard bulged a miscellaneous collection of
rubbish. A sense of depression obsessed her; _this_ was to be her
home! She sneezed and drew back hastily from the cloud of dust raised
by Microby's broom. As she dabbed at her eyes and nose with a small
and ridiculously inadequate handkerchief, she was conscious of an
uncomfortable lump in her throat, and the moisture that dampened the
handkerchief could not all be accredited to the sneeze tears. "What if
I have trouble locating the mine and have to stay here all summer?"
she was thinking, and instantly recalling the Watts ranch with its air
of shiftless decay, the smelly Watts blankets in the overcrowded
sleeping room, the soggy meals, the tapping of chickens' bills upon
the floor, and the never ending voice of Ma Watts, she smiled. It was
a weak, forced little smile, at first, but it gradually widened into a
real smile as her eyes swept the little valley with its long vista of
pine-clad hills that reached upward to the sky, their mighty sides and
shoulders gored by innumerable rock-rimmed coulees and ravines.
Somewhere amid the silence of those mighty slopes and high-flung peaks
her father had found Eldorado--had wrested nature's secret from the
guardianship of the everlasting hills. Her heart swelled with the
pride of him. She was ashamed of that sudden welling of tears. The
feeling of depression vanished and her heart throbbed to the lure of
the land of gold. The two small Wattses had scrambled into the
wagon-box.

"Yo' goin' to like hit," announced Watts, noticing the smile. "I
'lowed, fust-off yo'----"

"I'm going to _love_ it!" interrupted the girl vehemently. "My father
loved these hills, and I shall love them. And, as for the cabin! When
Microby and I get through with it, it's going to be the dearest little
place imaginable."

"Hit wus a good sheep camp," admitted Watts, his fingers fumbling
judiciously at his head. "An' they's a heap o' good feed goin' to
waste in this yere valley. But ef the cattlemen wants to pay fer what
they hain't gittin' hit hain't none o' my business, I reckon."

"Why did they drive the sheep out? Surely, there is room for all here
in the hills."

"Vil Holland, he claimed they cain't no sheeps stay in the hill
country. He claims sheeps is like small-poxt. Onct they git a-goin'
they spread, an' like's not, the hull country's ruint fer cattle
range."

"It seems that Vil Holland runs this little corner of Montana."

"He kind o' looks after things fer the cattlemen, but the prospectin's
got into his blood, an' he won't stick to the cattle, only on the
round-up, 'til he gits him a grub-stake. He's a good man--Vil is--ef
it wusn't fer foolin' 'round with the prospectin'."

Instantly, the girl's eyes flashed. "If it wasn't for the
prospecting!" she exclaimed, in sudden anger. "My father was a
prospector--and there was never a better man lived than he! Why is it
that everyone looks askance at a prospector? You talk like the people
back home! But, I'll show you all. My father made a strike. He told me
of it on his death-bed, and he gave me the map, and the photographs
and his samples. Maybe when I locate this mine and begin taking out
more gold every day than most of you ever saw, you won't talk of
people 'fooling around' prospecting. I tell you prospectors are the
finest men in the world! They must have imagination, and unending
patience, and the heart to withstand a thousand disappointments--" She
broke off suddenly as the soft rattle of bit-chains sounded from
behind her, and whirled to face Vil Holland. The man regarded her
gravely, unsmiling. A gauntleted hand raised the Stetson from his
head. As her eyes took in every detail, from the inevitable leather
jug, to the tip of polished buffalo horn, she flushed. How long had he
stood there, listening?

The cowpuncher seemed to divine her thoughts. "I just happened along,"
he said regarding her with his steady blue eyes. "I couldn't help
hearin' what you said about the prospectors. You're right in the
main."

"I was speaking of my father. I am Rodney Sinclair's daughter."

The man nodded. "Yes, I know."

Watts rubbed his chin apologetically. "We-all thought a right smart o'
yo' pa, didn't we, Vil? I didn't aim to rile yo'."

"I know you didn't!" the girl smiled. "And thank you so much for
bringing my things up so early." She turned to the cowboy who sat
regarding the outfit indifferently. "I hope you'll overlook my lack of
hospitality, but really I must get to work and help Microby or she'll
have the whole house cleaned before I get started."

"I saw the team here, an' thought I'd swing down to find out if Watts
was movin' in another sheep outfit."

"I've heard about your driving away the sheep man," returned Patty,
with more than a trace of sarcasm in her tone. "I am moving into this
cabin--am taking up my father's work where he left off. I suppose I
should ask your permission to prospect in the hill country."

"No," replied the man, gravely. "Just help yourself, only don't get
lost, an' remember yer dad knew enough to play a lone hand. I must be
goin', now. Good day." He turned his horse to see Microby standing in
the doorway. "Hello, Microby Dandeline! House cleanin', eh? I s'pect
you took in the picture show in town?"

"Yes, but circusts is better. I got some yallar ribbon fer my hat, an'
a awful lot o' candies."

"My, that's fine! How's ma an' the baby?"

"They stayed hum. The baby'd squall. Pa an' the boys is goin' to mend
fence, an' I'm a-goin' to stay yere an' he'p her clean up the sheep
camp."

The cowpuncher turned to Watts. "What's the big hurry about the
fences, Watts? You goin' to take over a bunch of stock?"

"Hosses," answered Watts with an important jerk at his scraggly beard.
"I done rented the upper pasture to a man name o' Schultz over in
Blackfoot country. Five dollars a month, I git fer hit, an' five
dollars fer every day er night they's hosses in hit. He done paid two
months' rent a'ready."

Vil Holland's brows puckered slightly. "Schultz, you say? Over in the
Blackfoot country?"

"Yas, he's aimin' to trail hosses from there over into Canady an' he
wants some pastures handy."

"Did Schultz see you about it himself?" asked Vil, casually.

"No, Monk Bethune; he come by this way, an' he taken the pasture for
Schultz."

Patty noted an almost imperceptible narrowing of the cowpuncher's
eyes, an expression, slight as it was, that spoke disapproval. The
man's attitude angered her. Here was poor Watts, about to undertake
the first work he had done in years, judging by the condition of the
ranch, under stimulus of the few dollars promised him by Bethune, and
this cowboy disapproved. "Are horses under the ban, too?" she asked
quickly. "Hasn't Mr. Watts the right to rent his land for a horse
pasture?"

The man's answer seemed studiously rude in its direct brevity. "No,
horses ain't under the ban. Yes, Watts can rent his land where he
wants to. Good day." Before the girl could reply he reined his horse
abruptly about, and disappeared in the timber upon the opposite side
of the creek.

"Reckon I better be gittin' 'long, too," said Watts. "Microby's
welcome to stay an' he'p yo'-all git moved in, but please mom, to
see't she gits started fer hum 'fore dark. Hit takes thet ol' pinto
'bout a hour to make the trip."

Patty promised, and unsaddling, picketed her horse, and joined the
girl in the dusty interior of the cabin. The musty hay, the discarded
garments, and the two bushels or more of odds and ends with which the
pack rats had filled the cupboard made a smudgy, smelly bonfire beside
which Patty paused with an armful of discarded magazines. "Wouldn't
you like to take these home?" she asked.

"Which?" inquired Microby, deftly picking a small stick from the
ground with her bare toes and tossing it into the fire.

"These magazines. There are stories and pictures in them."

"No, I don't want none. We-alls cain't read, 'cept Ma, an' she's got a
book--an' a bible, too," she added, with a touch of pride. "Davey, he
kin mos' read, an' he kin drawer pitchers, too. Reckon he'll be a
preacher when he's grow'd up, like Preacher Christie. He done read
outen a book when he babitized us-uns. I don't like to read. Ma, she
aimed to learn me onct, but I'd ruther shuck beans."

"Maybe you didn't keep at it long enough," suggested Patty.

"Yes, we did! We kep' at hit every night fer two nights 'til hit come
bedtime. I cain't learn them letters--they's too many diffe'nt ones,
an' all mixed up."

Patty smiled, but she did not toss the magazines into the fire.
Instead she laid them aside with the resolve that when opportunity
afforded, she would carry on the interrupted education.

Microby's literary delinquency in no wise impaired her willingness to
work. She had inherited none of her father's predilection toward
eternal rest, and all day, side by side with Patty, she scraped, and
scoured, and scrubbed, and washed, until the little cabin and its
contents fairly radiated cleanliness. The moving in was great fun for
the mountain girl. Especially the unpacking of the two trunks that
resisted all efforts to lift them until their contents had been
removed. But at last the work was finished even to the arrangement of
dishes and utensils, the stowing of supplies, and the blowing up of
the air mattress that replaced the musty hay of the sheep herder. And
as the long shadows of mountains crept slowly across the little valley
and began to climb the opposite slope, Patty stood in the door of her
cabin and watched Microby mount the superannuated Indian pony and
proceed slowly down the creek, her bare feet swinging awkwardly in the
loops of rope that served as stirrups of her dilapidated stock saddle.

When horse and rider disappeared into a grove of cottonwoods, Patty's
gaze returned to her immediate surroundings--her saddle-horse
contentedly snipping grass, the waters of the shallow creek burbling
noisily over the stones, the untidy scattering of tin cans, and the
leaning panels of the old sheep corral. She frowned at the panels.
"I'll just use you for firewood," she muttered. "And that reminds me
that I've got to wake up to my responsibility as head of the
household--even if the household does only consist of one bay cayuse,
named Dan, and a tiny one-room cabin, and two funny little
squirrel-tailed pack rats, and me." She reached for her brand new ax,
and picking her way from stone to stone, crossed the creek, and
attacked a sagging panel.

Patty Sinclair was no hot-house flower, and the hand that gripped the
ax was strong and brown and capable. Back home she had been known to
the society reporters as "an out-door girl," by which it was
understood that rather than afternoon auction at henfests, she
affected tennis, golf, swimming, and cross-country riding. She could
saddle her own horse, and paddle a canoe for hours on end. Even the ax
was no stranger to her hand, for upon rare occasions when her father
had returned during the summer months from his everlasting
prospecting, he had taken her to camp in the mountains, and there from
the quiet visionary whom she loved more than he ever knew, she learned
the ax, and the compass, and a hundred tricks of camp lore that were
to stand her well in hand. Partly inherited, partly acquired through
association with her father upon those never-to-be-forgotten
pilgrimages to the shrine of nature, her love of the vast solitudes
shone from her uplifted eyes as she stood for a moment, ax in hand,
and let her gaze travel slowly from the sun-gilded peaks of the
mountains, down their darkening sides, to the dusk-enshrouded reaches
of her valley. "He used to watch the sun go down, and he never wearied
at the wonder of it," she breathed, softly. "And then, as the darkness
deepened and the bull-bats came wheeling overhead, and the
whip-poor-wills began calling from the thickets, he would light his
pipe, and I would cuddle up close to him, and the firelight would grow
redder and brighter and the soft warm dark would grow blacker. The
pine trees would lose their shapes and blend into the formless night
and mysterious shadow shapes would dance to the flicker of the little
flames. It was then he would talk of the things he loved; of quartz,
and drift, and the mother lode; of storms, and bears, and the scent of
pines; of reeking craters, parched deserts, ice-locked barrens, and
the wind-lashed waters of lakes. 'And some day, little daughter,' he
would say, 'some day you are going with daddy and see all these things
for yourself--things whose grandeur you have never dreamed. It won't
be long, now--I'm on the right track at last--only till I've made my
strike.' Always--'it won't be long now.' Always--'I'm on the right
track, at last.' Always--'just ahead is the strike'--that lure, that
mocking chimera that saps men's lives! And now, he is--gone, and I am
chasing the chimera." Salt tears stung her eyes and blurred the
timbered slopes. "They said he was a--a ne'er-do-well. He became
almost a joke--" the words ended in a dry sob, as the bright blade of
the ax crashed viciously into the rotting panel. A few moments later
she picked up an armful of wood, and retracing her steps, piled it
neatly behind the stove. She lighted the fire, fetched a pail of water
from the spring, and moved the picketed cayuse to a spot beside the
creek where the grass was green and lush. She had intended after
supper to study her map and familiarize herself with the two small
photographs that were pinned to it. But, when the meal was over and
the dishes washed and put away she was too sleepy to do anything but
drop the huge wooden bar that the sheep herder had contrived to insure
himself against a possible night attack from his enemies into its
place and crawl into her bunk. How good it felt, she thought,
sleepily--the yielding air mattress, and the soft, clean blankets,
after the straw tick on the floor, and the course sour blankets in the
Wattses' stuffy room.

Somewhere, way off in the hills, a wolf howled and almost before the
sound had died away the girl was asleep.


CHAPTER VI

BETHUNE PAYS A CALL


It was past noon when Patty sank into the chair beside her table and
glanced about her with a sigh of satisfaction. Warm June sunlight
streamed through the open door and lay in a bright oblique patch upon
the scrubbed floor. The girl's glance strayed past the door and rested
with approval upon the little flat across the creek where a neat pile
of panels replaced the broken sheep corral. She had spent hours in
untwisting the baling wire with which they had been fastened to the
posts and dragging them to the pile, and other hours in chopping a
supply of firewood, and picking up the cans and broken bottles and
pitching them into the deep ravine of a side coulee. Also she had
built a little reservoir of rocks about her spring, and had found time
to add a few touches to the interior of the cabin. "It's just as homey
and cozy as it can be," she murmured, as her eyes strayed from the
little window where the colored chintz curtain stirred lightly in the
breeze, to the neatly arranged "dressing table" that she had contrived
with the aid of four light packing boxes and a bit of figured
cretonne. Another packing case, covered to match, served as a stool,
and upon the wall above the table hung a small mirror. Four or five
prints, looking oddly out of place, hung upon the dark log
walls--pictures that had always hung in her room at Aunt Rebecca's,
and which she had managed to crowd into one of the trunks. A fond
imagination had pictured them adorning the walls of her "apartment"
which was to be located in a spacious wing of the great Watts ranch
house. "I don't care, I'm glad there wasn't any big ranch house," she
muttered. "It's lots nicer this way, and I'm absolutely independent.
We prospectors can't hope to be regular in our habits--and I've always
wanted a house of my very own. Ten times better!" she exclaimed
vehemently. "There won't be anybody to ask me every day or two if I've
made my strike yet? And how much gold I brought back to-day? And all
the other fool questions that seem so humorous to questioners and
hearers, but which hurt and sting and rankle when you're sick at heart
with disappointment, and gritting your teeth to keep up your courage
and your belief in yourself. Oh I know! Daddy didn't know I knew, but
I did--how it hurt when the village wits would slyly wink at each
other as they asked their cruel questions. Even when I was a little
girl I knew, and I could have _killed_ them!" Her glance rested upon
the canvas covered pack that lay in the corner at the foot of the
bunk. "There are his things--his outfit, they call it here. I'm going
to examine it." The sack of stiff oiled canvas, with its contents, was
heavy, but the girl dragged it to the middle of the floor and
squatting beside it, stared in dismay at the stout padlock and the
chain that threaded a set of grommets. She was about to search for the
key among the contents of her father's pockets which she had placed in
the tray of her trunk, when her eye fell upon a thin slit close along
the edge of the hem that held the grommets--a slit that, pulled wide,
disclosed an aperture through which the contents of the sack could be
easily removed but withal so cunningly contrived as to escape casual
inspection. With an angry exclamation the girl stared at the gaping
hole. "Someone has cut it!" she cried. "He doesn't seem to have taken
much, though. It's about as full as it can be." She began hurriedly
to remove the contents, piling them about her upon the floor. "I
wonder if--if he left any papers, or note books, or maps, or things
that would enable anyone to locate the claim? If he did," she
muttered, peering into the empty sack, "they're gone, now."

One by one, she returned the belongings, handling them tenderly, now,
and examining them lovingly, and many an article was returned to the
sack, wet with its splash of hot tears. "Here's his coffee pot, and
his plate, and frying pan, and his old pipe--" the pipe she did not
replace, but put it with the other things in her trunk. "And
here--why, it's a revolver and a belt of cartridges--like Vil
Holland's! And a hat like his, too! And I thought he was a desperado
because he wore them!" She jumped to her feet and, hurrying to the
mirror, tried on the hat, pinching the crown into a peak, tilting it
this way and that, and arranging and rearranging the soft roll brim.
"It fits!" she cried, delighted as a child, and then with eyes
sparkling, picked up the belt with its row of yellow cartridges and
its ivory handled six gun dangling in the holster. Buckling the belt
about her waist, she laughed aloud as the buckle tongue came to rest a
full six inches beyond the last hole. "I'll look just as desperate as
he does, now--except for his old jug. Daddy didn't have any jug, and
I'm glad--that's where the difference is--it's the jug. But, I wish he
had had one of those black horn effects for his scarf." She knotted
the brilliant red scarf with its zigzag border of yellow, about her
neck, and snatching a small pair of scissors from the dressing table,
removed the heavy belt, and proceeded to bore a tongue hole at the
point she had marked with her finger nail. So engrossed she became in
the work, that she failed to hear the approach of horses' feet, and
started violently at the sound of a voice from the doorway. "Permit
me." The six shooter thudded to the floor, and sweeping the hat from
his head, Monk Bethune crossed the room, and replaced it upon the
table. He smiled as he noticed the scar left upon the thick leather by
the scissor points; and repeated. "Permit me, please." He drew a
penknife from his pocket, and picked up the belt. "A knife is so much
better."

Ashamed of having been startled, Patty smiled. "Yes, please do. I had
no idea it was so tough, or that scissors could be so dull."

Deftly twirling the penknife, Bethune bored a neat hole in the
leather. "There should be several holes," he smiled, "for there are
occasions in the hill country when one fails to connect with the
commissary, and then it is that the tightening of the belt answers the
purpose of a meal." Drilling as he talked, he soon finished the task
and held up the belt for inspection. "Rod Sinclair's gun," he
commented, sorrowfully. "And Rod's scarf, and hat, too. Ah, there was
a man, Miss Sinclair! I doubt if even you yourself knew him as I knew
him. You must ride and work with a man, in fair weather and foul; you
must share his hardships, and his disappointments, yes and his joys,
too, to really know him." A look of genuine affection shone from the
man's eyes as he stood drawing his fingers gently along the rims of
the shiny cartridges. He seemed to be speaking more to himself than to
the girl. His manner, the look in his eyes, the very tone of his
voice, were so intrinsically honest in their expression of unbounded
sympathy with his subject, and his mood fitted so thoroughly with her
own, that the girl's heart suddenly warmed toward this man who spoke
so feelingly of her father. She flushed slightly as she remembered
that upon the occasion of their previous meeting, his words had
engendered a feeling of distrust.

"You knew him--well?" she asked.

"Like a brother. For two years we have worked together in our search
for the mother lode that both believed lay concealed deep within the
bosom of these hills. A dozen times during those two years our hopes
have risen, as only the hopes can rise, of those who seek gold. A
dozen times it seemed certain that at last we had reached our goal.
But, always it was the same--a false lead--shattered hopes--and a
fresh start. Those were the times, Miss Sinclair, that your father
showed the stuff that was in him. He was a better man than I. It was
his Spartan acceptance of disappointment, his optimism, and his
unshaken faith in ultimate success, that kept me going. I suppose it
is my French ancestry that is responsible for my lack of just the
qualities that made your father the man he was. I lacked his
stability--his balance. I had imagination--vision, possibly greater
than his. And under the stimulus of apparent success, my spirits would
rise to heights his never knew. But I paid for it--no one knows how
bitterly I paid. For when apparent success turned into failure, mine
were depths of despair he never descended to. At first, before I
learned that his disappointment was as bitter as my own, his smiling
acceptance of failure, used to goad me to fury. There were times I
could have killed him with pleasure--but that was only at first.
Before we had been long together God knows how I came to depend on
those smiles. Then, at last, we struck it--and poor Rod--" The man's
voice which had dropped very low, broke suddenly. He cleared his
throat and turning abruptly, stared out the door toward the green
sweep of pines on the mountain slopes.

There was a long silence during which the words kept repeating
themselves in the girl's brain. "_Then, at last, we struck it._" What
did he mean? His back was toward her, and she saw that the muscles of
his neck worked slowly, as though he were swallowing repeatedly.

When at last she spoke, her voice sounded strangely dull to her own
ears. "Do you mean that you and my father were partners, and that you
know the location of his mine?"

Bethune faced her, laying the belt gently upon the table. "Partners?"
He repeated the word as though questioning himself. "Hardly partners,
I should say. We were--it is hard to define the exact relationship
that existed between Rod Sinclair and me. There was never any
agreement of partnership, rather a sort of tacit understanding, that
when we struck the lode, we should work it together. Your father knew
vastly more about rock than I, although I had long suspected the
existence of this lode. But extensive interests to the northward
prevented me from making any continued search for it. However, I found
time at intervals to spend a month or six weeks in these hills, and it
was upon one of these occasions that we struck up the acquaintance
that ripened into a sort of mutuality of interest. Neighbors are few
and far between in the hill country, and those not exactly of the type
that attract men of education. I think each found in the other a man
of his own stripe, and thus a friendship sprang up between us that
gradually led to a merging of interests. His were by far the most
valuable activities in the field, while I, from time to time, advanced
certain funds for the carrying on of the work.

"But let us not talk of business matters. Time enough for that." He
stepped to the doorway and glanced down the creek. "Here comes Clen
and we must be going. While he stopped at Watts's to reset a shoe I
rode on to inquire if there is any way in which I may serve the
daughter of my friend.

"Oh-ho! I see Clen is carrying something very gingerly. He has
prevailed upon the good Mrs. Watts to sell him some eggs. A great
gourmand--but a good fellow at heart. I think a great deal of Clen,
even though it was he who----"

"But tell me, before you go," interrupted the girl. "Do you know the
location of my father's mine?"

Bethune turned from the door, smiling. Patty noticed with surprise
that the dark, handsome features looked almost boyish when he smiled.
There had been no hint of boyishness before, in fact something of
baffling inscrutability in the black eyes, gave the man an expression
of extreme sophistication. "Do not call it a mine," he laughed. "At
least, not yet. A mine is a going proposition. If your father actually
succeeded in locating the lode, it is a strike. Had he filed, it would
be a claim. Had he started operation it would be a proposition--but
not until there is ore on the dump will it be a mine."

"If he actually succeeded!" cried Patty. "I thought you said----"

The man interrupted with a wave of the hand. "So I did, for I believe
he did succeed. In fact, knowing Rod Sinclair as I did, I am certain
of it."

"But the location of the--the strike," she persisted, "do you know
it?"

Bethune shook his head sadly. "Had your father filed the claim, all
would have been well. But, who am I to question Rod's judgment? For on
the other hand, if he had filed, word of the strike would have spread
broadcast, and the whole hill country would immediately have been
overrun by stampeders--those vultures that can scent a gold strike for
five thousand miles. No one knows where they come from, and no one
knows where they go. It was to guard our secret from these that
prompted your father not to file. We had planned to establish our
friends on the adjoining claims, and thus build up a syndicate of our
own choosing. So he did not file, but it was through no fault of his
that I remain ignorant of the location, but rather it was the result
of a combination of unforeseen circumstances. You shall judge for
yourself.

"I was deep in the wilds of British Columbia, upon another matter,
when Rod unearthed the lode, and, not knowing this, he hastened at
once to my camp. He found Clen there and after expressing
disappointment at my absence, sat down and hurriedly sketched a map,
and taking from his pocket a photograph, he wrapped both in a piece
of oilskin, and handed them to Clen, with instructions to travel night
and day until he had delivered the packet to me. He told him that he
had located the lode and was hurrying East to procure the necessary
capital and would return in the early spring for immediate operation."
Bethune paused and, with his eyes upon the Englishman who was
dismounting, continued:

"Poor Clen! He did his best, and I do not hold his failure against
him, for his was a journey of hardship and peril such as few men could
have survived. Upon receiving the packet he started within the hour.
That night he camped at the line, and that night, too, came the first
snow of the season. He labored on next day to the railway and took a
train to Edmonton, and from there, to Fort George, where he succeeded
in procuring an Indian guide for the dash into the wilderness beyond
the railway. The early months of last winter were among the most
terrible in the history of the North. But though young in years he was
already every inch a soldier of his country.

"This gallant gentleman," said the Vizier, "unaided, and at great personal
risk, shot a baby in arms."
"In arms?" asked the monarch sharply. "Surely that mitigates the
heroism?"
"I meant in its mother's arms," the Vizier hastily explained.

"Ah!" said the Emperor with a sigh of relief, "that reassures me."
And amid profound excitement he embraced the soldier, pinned the
coveted badge to his breast and bade him quickly return to the
front to carry on the great work.
"The next reward is for resource in emergency," said the master of
ceremonies an hour or so later.
He beckoned to a superb officer, splendid in his trappings--a
blue-eyed colossus of nearly six-feet-six.At the head of a newly frozen rapid, the Englishman suddenly
broke through and was plunged into the icy waters. Grasping the ice,
he managed to draw himself up so that his elbows rested upon the edge,
and in this position he called again and again to the guide. But the
Indian was far ahead, his ears were muffled in his fur cap, and the
wind roared through the scrub, drowning Clen's voice. The icy waters
numbed him and sucked at his body seeking to drag him to his doom. The
heavy pack was dragging him slowly backward, and his hold upon the ice
was slipping. Then, and not until then, Clen did what any other man
who possessed the strength, would have done. He worked the knife from
his belt and cut the straps of his pack sack. In an instant it
disappeared beneath the ice, and with it the location of your
father's strike. Relieved of the weight upon his shoulders, Clen had a
fighting chance for his life, but it is doubtful if he would have won
had it not been that the Indian, missing him at last, returned in the
nick of time, and with the aid of a loop of _babiche_, succeeded in
drawing him from the water. The rest of the day was spent in drying
Clen's clothing beside a miserable fire of brushwood, and the next day
they made Fort McLeod, more dead than alive."

"Lord" Clendenning had dismounted, deposited his precious basket of
eggs upon the ground, and stood in the doorway as Bethune concluded
his narrative. When the man ceased speaking the Englishman shook his
head sadly. "Yes, yes, it seemed to me then, as I clung to the edge of
the bloomin' ice, freezin' from my feet up, that my only chance was in
bein' rid of the pack. But, I've thought since that maybe if I'd held
on just a few minutes longer, the bloody Injun would have got there in
time to save both me an' the pack to boot."

"There you go again!" exclaimed Bethune, with a trace of impatience in
his voice. "How many times have I told you to quit this
self-accusation. A man who covered fifty miles on horseback, seven
hundred on the train, and then nearly a hundred a-foot, under
conditions such as you faced, has nothing to be ashamed of in the
failure of his mission. It is your loss as well as mine, for you also
were to have profited by the strike. It is possible, however, that all
will be well--that Miss Sinclair has her father's original map, and a
duplicate of the photograph, or better yet, the film from which the
print was made."

Pausing he glanced at the girl significantly, but she was gazing past
him--past Clendenning, her eyes upon the giant up-sweep of the hills.
He hurried on, "So now you have the whole story. I had not meant to
speak of it, to-day. Really, we must be going. If I can be of service
to you in any way, Miss Sinclair, I am yours to command. We will drop
in again, after you have had time to get used to your surroundings,
and lay our plans for the rediscovery of the mother lode." Smiling he
pointed to the canvas bag upon the floor. "Your father's pack sack,"
he said. "I should know it in a thousand. He devised it himself. It is
a clever combination of the virtues of several of the standard packs,
and an elimination of the evils of all." He stooped closer. "What's
this? You should not have cut it! Couldn't you find the key? If not,
it would have been a simple matter to file a link of the chain, and
leave the sack undamaged." He laughed, shortly. "But, that, I suppose,
is a woman's way."

"I did not cut it. It was cut before it came here. My father left it
in Mr. Watts's care and he stored it in the barn. Look at the edges,
it is an old cut."

"So it is!" exclaimed Bethune, as he and Lord Clendenning bent close
to examine it. "So it is. I wonder who--" Suddenly he ceased speaking,
and stood for a moment with puckered brows. "I wonder," he muttered.
"I wonder if he would have dared? Yes, I think he would. He knew of
Rod's strike, and he would stop at nothing to steal the secret."

"I don't believe Mr. Watts, nor any of the Wattses cut that pack,"
defended the girl.

"Neither do I. Watts has his faults, but dishonesty is not one of
them. No. The man who cut that pack, was the man who carried it
there----"

"Vil Holland!" exclaimed Lord Clendenning. "My word, d'ye think he'd
dare? Yes, Watts told us that he brought in the pack because Sinclair
was in a hurry. The bloody scamp! He should be jolly well trounced!
I'll do it myself if I see him, so help me Bob, I will!"

Bethune turned to the girl. "You have examined his effects. Was there
evidence of their having been tampered with?"

"I'm sure I don't know. If he left any papers or maps or things like
that in there it most certainly has been tampered with, for they are
not there now."

The man smiled. "I think we are safe in assuming that there were no
maps or papers of value in the outfit. Your father was far too shrewd
to have left anything of the sort to the tender mercies of Vil
Holland. By cutting the pack Vil merely gave evidence of his
unscrupulous methods without in any way profiting by it. And, as for
the map and photographs in your possession, I should advise you to
find some good hiding place for them and not trust to carrying them
about upon your person." Swiftly Patty glanced at the speaker. That
last injunction, somehow, did not ring quite true. But he had turned
to the door, and a moment later when he faced her to bid her adieu,
the boyish smile was again curling his lips, and he mounted and rode
away.


CHAPTER VII

IN THE CABIN


For a long time after the departure of her visitors, Patty Sinclair
sat thinking. Was it true, all this man had told her? She remembered
vividly the beautiful tribute he had paid her father and the emotion
that had gripped him as he finished. Surely his words rang true. They
were true, or else the man was a consummate actor as well as an
unscrupulous knave. She recalled the boyish smile, the story of Lord
Clendenning's terrible journey, and the impatience with which he had
silenced the Englishman's self-criticism. What would be more natural
than that two men thrown together in the middle of the hill country,
as her father and Bethune had been thrown together, should have pooled
their interests, especially if each possessed an essential that the
other did not. There had been somehow a sincerity about the man that
carried conviction. She liked his ready admission that her father's
knowledge of mining greatly exceeded his own. And the assertion that
he had advanced sums of money for the carrying on of the work sounded
plausible enough, for the girl knew that her father's income had been
small--pitiably small, but enough, he had always insisted, for his
meager needs. Unquestionably, up to that point the man's words had
carried the ring of truth. Then came the false notes; the open
accusation of Vil Holland, and the warning as to the concealment of
the map and photos which she had twice purposely refused to admit that
she possessed. This was the second time he had gone out of his way to
warn her against Vil Holland. On occasion of their previous meeting,
he had hinted that Holland might pose as a friend of her father--a
pose Bethune, himself, boldly assumed. Perhaps Vil Holland had been a
friend of her father. In the matter of the pack sack, to whom would a
man intrust his belongings, if not to a friend? Surely not to an
enemy, nor to one he had reason to suspect. And now Bethune openly
accused him of cutting the pack sack, and intimated that he would not
hesitate to rob her of her secret.

For a long time she sat with her elbow on the table and her chin
resting in her palm, staring out at the overshadowing hills. "If there
was only somebody," she muttered. "Somebody I could--" Suddenly she
leaped to her feet. "No, I'm glad there isn't! I'll play the game
alone! I came out here to do it, and I'll do it, in spite of forty Vil
Hollands, and Bethunes, and Lord Clendennings! I'll find the mine
myself--and I'll call it a mine, too, if I want to! And then, after I
find it, if Mr. Monk Bethune can show me that he is entitled to a
share in it, I'll give it to him--and not before. I'll stay right here
till I find it, or till my money gives out, and when it does, I'll
earn some more and come back again till that's gone!" Crossing the
room, she stamped determinedly out the door, threw the saddle onto her
cayuse, and rode rapidly down the creek. Horseback riding always
exhilarated her, even back home where she had been obliged to keep to
roads, or the well-worn courses of the hunt club. But here in the
hills where the very air was a tonic that sent the blood coursing
through her veins, and where tier after tier, the mighty mountains
rolled away into the distance, as if flaunting a challenge to come and
explore their secrets, and unscarred valleys gave glimpses of alluring
vistas, the exhilaration amounted almost to intoxication. That
this was no idle conjecture, rather a well-thought-out possibility
intelligently provided for, appeared when he went on to describe how
the contingency must be faced. The enemy had already brought his
full resources into the field. It was a maximum which, after a succession
of days like last Sunday, must necessarily diminish. On the other hand,
whilst we have put a comparatively small force afoot, there is behind
it, at home and in the Colonies, a vast reserve which, diligently trained
and organised, will steadily reinforce the fighting line. In the course
of six or seven months there will be a total of thirty divisions,
continually kept up to full fighting strength.

Nor was that all.

"If," said the soldier-Minister, "the war be protracted, and if its
fortune be varied or adverse, exertions and sacrifices beyond
any already demanded will be required from the whole nation and
Empire."
Ominous words increasing prevalent gloom. At least satisfactory to know
that in his official communications KITCHENER will always cheer us by
presenting to closest view the worst that has actually happened
or is possibly in store.

_Business done._--KITCHENER makes his maiden speech.

Illustration: ANOTHER "SCRAP OF PAPER." (K. of K.)
_House of Commons, Wednesday._--No one looking in on House this afternoon
would imagine that the country is engaged in an armed fight, issues
of which will in one direction or another transform the aspect of
Europe.

Atmosphere unruffled. "Business as usual" the order of the day.

Pretty full attendance considering House has with brief intervals
been in session since February and meets again at what in normal
times would be period of full recess.

PREMIER on Treasury Bench at opening of sitting. Having answered a few
questions, withdrew to his private room and was no more seen.

LLOYD GEORGE, left in charge, moved through various stages series
of emergency measures.

On Currency and Bank Note Bill question of design of new twenty-shilling
and ten-shilling notes came up. Some disrespectful things said of
it.
CHANCELLOR OF EXCHEQUER admitted its imperfection but pleaded that
in the hurried circumstances of the day it was the best that could
be done.

Exception especially taken on score that the design made forgery
easy.
Here the CHANCELLOR differed.

"I have been told by an expert in these matters," he said, with the
pleased air of one recalling the dictum of a respected friend, "that
the plainer the design on a note the more difficult it is to forge
it."

All the same the notes are to be called in and replaced.

_Business done._--Second reading of Bill giving Government blank cheque
for meeting expenses of war carried without debate or division.

_Thursday._--PREMIER'S surpassing gift of speech, equally concise and
eloquent, never more brilliantly displayed than this afternoon.
Proposed Resolution conveying expression of sympathy and admiration
for heroic resistance offered by the Belgian Army and people to wanton
invasion of their territory. In speech that occupied less than ten
minutes in delivery the PREMIER, himself moved to loftiest pitch
of righteous indignation, touched deepest feelings of a crowded
House.

Referring to Great Britain's intervention in "a quarrel in which it
had no direct concern," he pointed out that the country threw away
the scabbard only when confronted by necessity of choice between
keeping and breaking solemn obligations, between the discharge of
a binding trust and a shameless subservience.

A deep-throated cheer approved his emphatic declaration, "We do not
repent our decision."

Cheers rang forth again when in another fine passage he said, "The
Belgians have won for themselves the immortal glory which belongs
to a people who prefer freedom to ease, to security, even to life
itself.

We are proud of their alliance and their friendship. We salute them
with respect and honour. We are with them heart and soul."
Difficult to follow outburst of genuine eloquence like this, delivered
with thrilling force.

BONAR LAW in equally brief speech voiced hearty acquiescence of
Opposition in Resolution. JOHN REDMOND, associating Ireland whole-heartedly
with it, made practical suggestion, that, instead of lending Belgium
ten millions as proposed, we should hand the money over to her as
a free gift, an instalment of a just debt.

_Business done._--More Emergency Bills advanced by stages. Ominous
hint of fresh taxation dropped by CHANCELLOR.

* * * * *
Illustration: FOR NEUTRAL CONSUMPTION.

* * * * *

Illustration: GERMAN KAISER. "We are not satisfied with Our moustache;
it seems to need support on the Eastern side

."

* * * * *

BLANCHE'S LETTERS

THE WAR SPIRIT
_Park Lane._
DEAREST DAPHNE,--There was a big party of us at the Clackmannans'
Scotch place, Blairbinkie, when all these fearful things began to
happen--and now where are we all? The Flummery boys and ever so many
more of the party are at the front with their regiments. The Duke of
Clackmannan is at the head of the Clackmannan Yeomanry.

Norty's gone off to help take care of the East coast, and it's lucky to
have _him_ helping to protect it and keep watch, for if there's
_anybody_ who could see things coming sooner than anybody else
it's Norty!

Stella, Beryl, Babs and your Blanche are all back in Town, and when
we're not taking lessons in nursing we're sewing at flannel.

I make Yvonne do my hair quite, _quite_ plainly, and I'm giving my
jewels to my country. I've already given my dear collar of pearls. I
gave that first because I love it best of all my jewels, because
it can _never_ be replaced, and because pearls suit me better than
_any_ other stone.

All our first fingers are covered with pricks and look immensely
horrid, but we glory in it and won't even put any cold cream on them!

As I said yesterday afternoon, when we were all sewing away at flannel,
if _any_ woman, I don't care _who_, offered me her hand and I saw
that the first finger was _smooth_ I'd refuse to take it!

Beryl must needs weigh in with, "But, my dear Blanche, she wouldn't
offer you her _left_ hand!
It's the _left_ forefinger that gets punished in needlework." "The
principle is the same," I answered coldly. "And besides, some people
are left-handed." Beryl has decent qualities, I know, and
one doesn't want to find fault with anyone just now, but she was
always like that--and her _hemming_, dearest!

Babs is wild to go to the front, but I say she'd be only a nuisance
until she knows more about nursing. Someone told me the
other day, _à propos_ of untrained women going to the front and
hindering instead of helping, that during the last war a poor dear
in one of the hospitals had his hair parted _fifty_ times in an hour
by _fifty_ different people, and nearly got brain-fever.

There was a man in the party at Blairbinkie who, before we were at war,
talked _fervidly_ of what he should do for his country if trouble
came.

I had not liked Hector Swankington the least little bit before that, but
when he said that, in the event of war, he would raise a troop at
his own expense, call it "Swankington's Horse" and lead it himself
"wherever the fighting was hottest," I thought I'd not done him
justice.

So I listened to him and approved and encouraged the plan. And then the
storm burst and we all scattered. The other morning I met him in the
Park when I was taking my early walk. He asked if I would dine with him
some evening at the "Iridescent," and I said it was not a time for
dining at restaurants. "No," he agreed, "it certainly isn't now all the
French cooks are gone; and what an idiotic idea this is about reducing
the number of courses at dinner! Silly rot, I call it!"
I ignored this and asked, "What about 'Swankington's Horse'?"

"Oh! that's all off," he said huffily. "I wrote to the authorities
about raising the troop, asked what State recognition I should get,
and enclosed a drawing of the hat I meant to wear as leader--a
ripping scheme, turned up at one side and with a bunch of
feathers. All the answer I got was a few brief words of acknowledgment
and a request to set about it at once and report myself somewhere
or other. Not a word of the State recognition I was to receive, and
the drawing of the hat returned with 'Not approved' scrawled across
it. So I've chucked the whole business. And now don't let us talk
of _that_ any more!"
I gave him my freezing look (you've never seen my freezing look,
dearest--it's _terrible_!) and I said with a little calm deadly
manner that I very, _very_ seldom use, "I've no wish to talk to you
of _that_--or of anything else--ever again." And I left him.

The party at Blairbinkie that scattered almost as soon as it assembled
was by way of being a farewell to the old place, for the Clackmannans
had virtually sold it to a Mr. Spragg, of Pittsburg. He was going
to have the old castle taken across in bits and set up again in
Pennsylvania; and he was taking all the family portraits, the
mausoleum, the old trees in the park and the stags at a valuation,
as well as the village itself with all its cottages and people,
in order that the castle might have its proper _setting_ out there.

There were two more things he wanted included in the bargain--a
village idiot and a family ghost ("hereditary spectre," he called
it).

Ah, my dear! all this belongs to the happy old days of a hundred years
ago, when we were all three or four weeks younger. The man from Pittsburg,
so far from being able to buy Blairbinkie, hardly knows where
to look for his next meal, and as for shipping castles and trees
and mausoleums and village idiots and family ghosts across the Atlantic
he only wishes he could get _himself_ across, even if he had to
work his passage!

Josiah is at the uttermost ends of the earth. He went in June, about
rubber-mines or oil-concessions, I'm not sure which. I had a cable
from him the other day from a place that began with "Boo" and ended
with "atty"--I forget what came between.

He told me not to be anxious, that he'd get back when and how he could.
My answer was, "Not anxious.
Wherever you are you'd better stay there, or you may get taken
prisoner by those creatures, and then I'd never forgive you!"
Talking of prisoners reminds me of a rumour about the Bullyon-Boundermeres.
They were cruising somewhere in their new big steam-yacht when war
broke out, and now there's a report that the enemy have taken the
yacht and turned it into a cruiser; that the Bullyon-Boundermere people
are prisoners on board, and that they're making _her_ wash dishes
and forcing _him_ to work as a stoker or a bulkhead or some fearful
thing of that kind! This is not _official_, my dear, but I give it
you for what it's worth.

I called a little meeting here yesterday about a scheme of mine. Beryl
and Babs and your Blanche and several more of us are really _crack_
shots, and I want to form us into a band of rifle-women and ask
the Powers that be to let us guard some important place--a bridge
or a bank or a powder magazine. We should wear a distinctive uniform,
and we wouldn't let anyone come _near_! Babs said she hoped the uniform
would be smart and becoming, but I soon shut her up. "This is not a
time to think of cut or colour," I told her. "Myself, I shouldn't
care _how_ my uniform was cut--even if the _shoulder_ seams were at the
_elbows_.

And as for colour I'd wear _grass-green_, though it's a colour in which
I look a mere _fiend_, if it would help my country!" And Beryl and
Babs cried and kissed me.

Ever thine, BLANCHE

.

* * * * *
Illustration: _The Lady of the House_, "JUST THE PERSON I WANTED TO
SEE. I'VE STARTED TEN COMMITTEES IN CONNECTION WITH THE WAR AND I WANT
YOUR HELP."
_Visitor._ "MY _DEAR_! I'VE JUST STARTED TWELVE AND I SIMPLY _COUNTED_
ON YOU!"
* * * * *
"The Suez Canal has brought St. Helena much closer than in Napoleonic
days."
_T.P.'s Weekly._

In the same way the opening of the Panama Canal has made Heligoland
much more adjacent than in Lord SALISBURY'S days.

* * * * *
ODE TO JOHN BRADBURY.

(_The new notes for_ £1 _and_ 10s. _are signed by JOHN BRADBURY._)

When the Red KAISER, swoll'n with impious pride And stuffed with
texts to serve his instant need, Took Shame for partner and Disgrace
for guide, Earned to the full the hateful traitor's meed, And bade
his hordes advance Through Belgium's cities towards the fields of
France; And when at last our patient island race, By the attempted
wrong Made fierce and strong, Flung back the challenge in the braggart's
face, Oh then, while martial music filled the air, Clarion and fife
and bagpipe and the drum, Calling to men to muster, march, and dare,
Oh, then thy day, JOHN BRADBURY, was come.

JOHN BRADBURY, the Muse shall fill my strain To sing thy praises;
thou hadst spent thy time Not idly, nor hadst lived thy life in vain,
Unfitted for the guerdon of my rhyme.
For lo, the Funds went sudden crashing down, And men grew pale
with monetary fear, And in the toppling mart The stoutest heart
Melted, and fortunes seemed to disappear; And some, forgetting their
austere renown, Went mad and sold Whate'er they could and wildly called
for Gold!

"Since through no fault of ours the die was cast We shall go forth
and fight In death's despite And shall return victorious at the last;
But how, ah how," they said, "Shall we and ours be fed And clothed
and housed from dreary day to day, If, while our hearths grow cold,
we have no coin to pay?"
Then thou, where no gold was and little store Of silver, didst appear
and wave thy pen, And with thy signature Make things secure, Bidding
us all pluck up our hearts once more And face our foolish fancied fears
like men.
"I give you notes," you said, "of different kinds To ease your anxious
minds:
The one is black and shall be fairly found Equal in value to a
golden pound; The other--mark its healthy scarlet print-- Is worth a
full half-sovereign from the Mint."
Thus didst thou speak--at least I think thou didst-- And, lo, the
murmurs fell And all things went right well, While thy notes fluttered
in our happy midst.
Therefore our grateful hearts go forth to thee, Our British note-provider,
brave JOHN BRADBURY!

R. C. L.

* * * * *
"BELGIUM.--Can any member let me know as to what kind of weather to
expect in Belgium towards the end of October, and as to the condition
of the roads? I and my wife propose going a tandem tour at that
time in the Ardennes, Luxembourg, etc. Are most of the hotels shut for
the season at that time? Would the north of France be preferable?--G.
J."--_C. T. C. Gazette._
This gentleman is evidently particular. We are half afraid he will not
get quite what he wants.

* * * * *
THE COLUMN OF ADVENTURE.

Even _The Times'_ "agony column," my staple reading during
toast-and-marmalade, suffers from the all-pervading war. Old friends
have dropped out of the column on its war march. No longer does the
Young Gentleman yearning for the idyllic life call on the charitable
to provide him with a year of perfect ease, comfort and luxury. I
had hoped to meet him some day, to draw out his confidences, perchance
to edit his memoirs. "My Check is My Fortune" would be a catchy title.
But apparently the War has put him out of business. The idyllic life
has gone. Another victim.

His place is being filled by the Sportsman, eager to be up and
shooting--partridges. "Either singly or with a house party," he
offers.

He asks only for board, lodging and ammunition. These provided, he is
willing to go for the enemy all September and October.

Another Sportsman, humbler in aspiration, is prepared to specialise on
rabbits. He is ready to continue the fight until "Peace terms dictated
in Berlin by Allies."
There has also arisen the Professional Rescuer. He offers to go abroad--for
a cash consideration--and smuggle back stranded relatives.
He does not give particulars of personal appearance, but one may
imagine him as essentially Williamlequeuish--small dark moustache,
super-shrewd eyes, Homburg hat, a revolver in every pocket, speaking
six languages more fluently than the natives, and on terms of
intimacy with half the diplomats of Europe. He would open his
conversation with a casual: "The last time I was chatting with the
KAISER (I shall, of course, cut him in future)...."
Another occupation has been called into being by the War. It is
that of Berth-Snatcher. He is apparently a City man who has realised
all his securities and invested them in berths and staterooms on
Atlantic Liners. These he now offers "at a small bonus"--exact
amount unstated.
Also interesting is the occupation of Amateur Adviser. He has much
well-intentioned advice to offer to all and sundry: "To the War
Office.
It is hoped that something is being done regarding," etc. Or: "Japan,
our Ally, could easily lend us half a million men."
Presumably the Amateur Adviser has been denied place in the
correspondence columns.
The Young Hungarian Nobleman, whose remittances have been stopped
by the war, is reminiscent of the original yearner for the idyllic
life. "Is supposed to be of good appearance," he states with obtrusive
modesty.
But the romantic halo around these young aristocrats is rather
tarnished by the Young French Vicomte. When he advertises that he
"would thankfully accept some clothes from English or American
gentlemen," one suspects a snug little second-hand business somewhere
in savoury Soho.

* * * * *
From a letter in _The Bristol Evening Times_:--
"Only last evening I was passing through one of our main thoroughfares,
and saw seven or eight Territorials taking refreshment in the
backbone. I ask in fairness, Is this the backbone.Out in the clearing, a man was
bridling a tall buckskin horse. The man was Vil Holland. Curbing a
desire to retreat unobserved into the timber, the girl advanced boldly
across the creek and pulled up beside the fire. At the sound the man
whirled, and Patty noticed that a lean, brown hand dropped swiftly to
the butt of the revolver.

"Don't shoot!" she called, in a tone that was meant to be sarcastic,
"I won't hurt you." Somehow, the sarcasm fell flat.

The man buckled the throat-latch of his bridle and picking up the
reins, advanced hat in hand, leading the horse. "I beg your pardon,"
he said, gravely, "I didn't know who it was, when your horse splashed
through the creek."

"You have enemies in the hills? Those you would shoot, or who would
shoot you?"

He dropped the bridle reins, allowing them to trail on the ground. "If
some kinds of folks wasn't a man's enemy he wouldn't be fit to have
any friends," he said, simply. "And here in the hills it's just as
well to be forehanded with your gun. Won't you climb down? I suppose
you've had breakfast?"

Patty swung from the saddle and stood holding the bridle reins. "Yes,
I've had breakfast, thank you. Don't let me keep you from yours."

"Had mine, too. If you don't mind I'll wash up these dishes, though.
Just drop your reins--like mine. Your cayuse will stand as long as the
reins are hangin'. It's the way they're broke--'tyin' 'em to the
ground,' we call it." He glanced at her horse's feet, and pointed to a
place beneath the fetlock from which the hair had been rubbed: "Rope
burnt," he opined. "You oughtn't to put him out on a picket rope. Use
hobbles. There's a couple of pair in your dad's war-bag."

"War-bag?"

"Yeh, it's down in Watts's barn, if he ain't hauled it up for you."

"What are hobbles?"

The man stepped to the tent and returned a moment later with two heavy
straps fastened together by a bit of chain and a swivel. "These are
hobbles, they work like this." He stooped and fastened the straps
about the forelegs of the horse just above the fetlock. "He can get
around all right, but he can't get far, and there is no rope to snag
him."

Patty nodded. "Thank you," she said. "I'll try it. But how do you know
there are hobbles in dad's pack?"

"Where would they be? He had a couple of pair. All his stuff is in
there. He always traveled light."

"Did you leave my father's war-bag, as you call it, at Watts's?"

"Yeh, he was in somethin' of a hurry and didn't want to go around by
the trail, so he left his outfit here and struck straight through the
hills."

"Why was he in a hurry?"

The man placed the dishes in a pan and poured water over them. "I've
got my good guess," he answered, thoughtfully.

"Which may mean anything, and tells me nothing."

Holland nodded, as he carefully wiped his tin plate. "Yeh, that's
about the size of it."

His attitude angered the girl. "And I have heard he was not the only
one in the hills that was in a hurry that day, and I suppose I can
have my 'good guess' at that, and I can have my 'good guess' as to who
cut daddy's pack sack, too."

"Yeh, an' you can change your guess as often as you want to."

"And every time I change it, I'd get farther from the truth."

"You might, an' you might get nearer." The cowpuncher was looking at
her squarely, now. "You ain't left-handed, are you?" he asked,
abruptly.

"No, of course not! Why?"

"Because, if you ain't, you better change that belt around so the
holster'll carry on yer right side--or else leave it to home."

The coldly impersonal tone angered the girl. "Much better leave it
home," she said, "so if anyone wanted to get my map and photographs,
he could do it without risk."

"If you had any sense you'd shut up about maps an' photos."

"At least I've got sense enough not to tell whether I carry them with
me, or keep them hidden in a safe place."

"You carry 'em on you!" commanded the man, gruffly. "It's a good deal
safer'n _cachin_' 'em." He laid his dishes aside, poured the water
from the pan, wiped it, hung it in its place, and picking up his
saddle blanket, examined it carefully.

"I wonder why my father entrusted his pack sack to you?" said Patty,
eyeing him resentfully. "Were you and he such great friends?"

"Knew one another tolerable well," answered Holland, dryly.

"You weren't, by any chance--partners, were you?"

He glanced up quickly. "Didn't I tell you once that yer dad played a
lone hand?"

"You knew he made a strike?"

"That's what folks think. But I suppose he told Monk Bethune all about
it."

The thinly veiled sneer goaded the girl to anger. "Yes, he did," she
answered, hotly, "and he told me, too!"

"Told Monk all about it, did he--location an' all, I suppose?"

"He intended to, yes," answered the girl, defiantly. "The day he made
his strike, Mr. Bethune happened to be away up in British Columbia,
and daddy told Lord Clendenning that he had made his strike, and he
drew a map and sent it to Mr. Bethune by Lord Clendenning."

Holland smoothed the blanket into place upon the back of the buckskin,
and reached for his saddle. "An' of course, Monk, he wouldn't file
till you come, so you'd be sure an' get a square deal----"

"He never got the map or the photos. Lord Clendenning lost them in a
river. And he nearly lost his life, and was rescued by an Indian."

There was a sound very like a cough, and Patty glanced sharply at the
cowpuncher, but his back was toward her, and he was busy with his
cinch. "Tough luck," he remarked, as he adjusted the latigo strap.
"An', you say, yer dad told you all about this partnership business?"

"No, he didn't."

"Who did?"

"Mr. Bethune."

"Oh."

Something in the tone made the girl feel extremely foolish. Holland
was deliberately strapping the brown leather jug to his saddle horn,
and gathering up her reins, she mounted. "At least, Mr. Bethune is a
gentleman," she emphasized the word nastily.

"An' they can't hang him for that, anyway," he flung back, and swung
lightly into the saddle, "I must be goin'."

"And you don't even deny cutting the pack?"

He looked her squarely in the eyes and shook his head. "No. You kind
of half believe Monk about the partnership. But you don't believe I
cut that pack, so what's the use denying it?"

"I do----"

"If you should happen to get lost, don't try to outguess your compass.
Always pack a little grub an' some matches, an' if you need help,
three shots, an' then three more, will bring anyone that's in hearin'
distance."

"I hope I shall never have to summon you for help."

"It is quite a bother," admitted the other. "An' if you'll remember
what I've told you, you prob'ly won't have to. So long."

The cowboy settled the Stetson firmly upon his head, and with never a
glance behind him, headed his horse down the little creek.

The girl watched him for a moment with angry eyes, and then, urging
her horse forward, crossed the plateau at a gallop, and headed up the
valley. "Of all the--the _boors_! He certainly is the limit. And the
worst of it is I don't know whether he deliberately tries to insult
me, or whether it's just ignorance. Anyway, I wouldn't trust him as
far as I could see him. And I do believe he cut daddy's pack sack, so
there!" The heavy revolver dangling at her side attracted her
attention, and she pulled up her horse and changed it to the opposite
side. "I suppose I did look like a fool," she admitted, "but he
needn't have told me so. And I bet I know as much about a compass as
he does, anyway. And I'll tie my horse up with a rope if I want to."

Beyond the plateau, the valley narrowed rapidly, and innumerable
ravines and coulees led steeply upward to lose themselves among the
timbered slopes of the mountain sides. Crossing a low divide at the
head of the valley, she reined in her horse and gazed with thumping
heart into the new valley that lay before her. There, scarcely a mile
away, stretched a rock ledge--and, yes, there were scraggly trees
fringing its rim, and the valley was strewn with rock fragments! Her
valley! The valley of the photographs! She laughed aloud, and urged
her horse down the steep descent, heedless of the fact that upon the
precarious, loose rock footing of the slope, a misstep would mean
almost certain destruction.

Directly opposite the face of the rock wall she pulled her horse to a
stand. "Surely, this must be the place, but--where is the crack? It
should be about there." Her eyes searched the face of the cliff for
the zigzag crevice. "Maybe I'm too close to it," she muttered. "The
picture was taken from a hillside across the valley. That must be the
hill--the one with the bare patch half way up. That's right where he
must have stood when he took the photograph." The hillside rose
abruptly, and abandoning her horse, the girl climbed the steep ascent,
pausing at frequent intervals for breath. At last, she stood upon the
bare shoulder of the hill and gazed out across the valley, and as she
gazed, her heart sank. "It isn't the place," she muttered. "There is
no big tree, and the rock cliff isn't a bit like the one in the
picture--and I thought I had found it sure! I wonder how many of those
rock walls there are in the hills? And will I ever find the right
one?"

Once more in the saddle, she crossed another divide and scanned
another rock wall, and farther down, another. "I believe every single
valley in these hills has its own rock ledge, and some of them three
or four!" she cried disgustedly, as she seated herself beside a tiny
spring that trickled from beneath a huge rock, and proceeded to devour
her lunch. "I had no idea how hungry I could get," she stared ruefully
at the paper that had held her two sandwiches. "Next time I'll bring
about six."

Producing her compass, she leveled a place among the stones. "Let's
see if I can point to the north without its help." She glanced at the
sun and carefully scanned the tumultuous skyline. "It is there," she
indicated a gap between two peaks, and glanced at the compass. "I knew
I wouldn't get turned around," she said, proudly. "I didn't miss it
but just a mite--anyway it's near enough for all practical purposes.
If that's north," she speculated, "then I must have started east and
then turned south, and then west, and then south again, and my cabin
must be almost due north of me now." She returned the compass to her
pocket. "I'll explore a little farther and then work toward home."

Mounting, she turned northward, and emerging abruptly from a clump of
trees, caught a glimpse of swift motion a quarter of a mile away,
where her trail had dipped into the valley, as a horse and rider
disappeared like a flash into the timber. "He's following me!" she
cried angrily, "sneaking along my trail like a coyote! I'll tell him
just what I think of him and his cowardly spying." Urging her horse
into a run, she reached the spot to find it deserted, although it
seemed incredible that anyone could have negotiated the divide
unnoticed in that brief space of time. "I saw him plain as day," she
murmured, as she turned her horse toward the opposite side of the
valley. "I couldn't tell for sure that it was he--I didn't even see
the color of the horse--but who else could it be? He knew I started
out this way, and he knew that I carried the map and photos, and was
hunting daddy's claim. I know, now who was watching the other night."
She shuddered. "And I've got to stay here 'til I find that claim,
knowing all the time that I am being watched! There's no place I can
go that he will not follow. Even in my own cabin, I'll always feel
that eyes are watching me. And when I do find the mine, he'll know it
as soon as I do, and it will be a race to file." Drawing up sharply,
she gritted her teeth, "And he knows the short cuts through the hills,
and I don't. But I will know them!" she cried, "and when I do find the
mine, Mr. Vil Holland is going to have the race of his life!"

Another parallel valley, and another, she explored before turning her
horse's head toward the high divide that she had reasoned separated
her from Monte's Creek at a point well above her cabin. Comparatively
low ridges divided these valleys, and as she topped each ridge, the
girl swerved sharply into the timber and, concealing herself, intently
watched the back trail--a maneuver that caused the solitary horseman
who watched from a safe distance, to chuckle audibly as he carefully
wiped the lenses of his binoculars.

The sunlight played only upon the higher peaks when at last, weary and
dispirited, she negotiated the steep descent to Monte's Creek at a
point a mile above the sheep camp. "If he'd only photographed
something besides a rock wall," she muttered, petulantly, "I'd stand
some show of finding it." At the door of the cabin she slipped from
her saddle, and pausing with her hand on the coiled rope, dropped her
eyes to the rubbed place below her horse's fetlock. A moment later she
knelt and fastened a pair of hobbles about the horse's ankles, and,
removing the saddle, watched the animal roll clumsily in the grass,
and shuffle awkwardly to the creek where he sucked greedily at the
cold water. Entering the cabin, she lighted the lamp and stared about
her. Her glance traveled one by one over the objects of the little
room. Everything was apparently as she had left it--yet--an
uncomfortable, creepy sensation stole over her. She knew that the room
had been searched.


CHAPTER IX

PATTY TAKES PRECAUTIONS


During the next few days Patty Sinclair paid scant attention to rock
ledges. Each morning she saddled her cayuse and rode into the hills to
the southward, crossing divides and following creeks and valleys from
their sources down their winding, twisting lengths. After the first
two or three trips she left her gun at home. It was heavy and
cumbersome, and she realized, in her unskilled hand, useless. Always
she felt that she was being followed, but, try as she would, never
could catch so much as a fleeting glimpse of the rider who lurked on
her trail. Nevertheless, during these long rides which she made for
the sole purpose of familiarizing herself with all the short cuts
through the hills, she derived satisfaction from the fact that, while
the trips were of immense value to her, Vil Holland was having his
trouble for his pains.

Ascertaining at length that, after crossing the high divide at the
head of Monte's Creek, any valley leading southward would prove a
direct outlet onto the bench and thereby furnish a short cut to town,
she returned once more to her prospecting--to the exploration of
little valleys, and the examination of innumerable rock ledges.

Accepting as part of the game the fact that her cabin was searched
almost daily during her absence she derived grim enjoyment in
contemplation of the searcher's repeated disappointment. Several
attempts to surprise the marauder at his work proved futile, and she
was forced to admit that in the matter of shrewdness and persistence,
his ability exceeded her own. "The real test will come when I locate
the mine," she told herself one evening, as she sat alone in her
little cabin. "Then the prize will go to the fastest horse." She drew
a small folding check-book from her pocket and frowningly regarded its
latest stub. "A thousand dollars isn't very much, and--it's half
gone."

Next day she rode out of the hills and, following the trail for town,
dismounted at Thompson's ranch which nestled in its coulee well out
upon the bench, and waited for the rancher, who drove up beside a huge
stack with a load of alfalfa, to unhitch his team.

"Have you a good saddle horse for sale?" she asked, abruptly.

Thompson released the tug chains, and hung the bridles upon the hames,
whereupon the horses of their own accord started toward the stable,
followed by a ranch hand who slid from the top of the stack. Without
answering, he called to the man: "Take the lady's horse along an' give
him a feed."

"It's noon," he explained, turning to the girl. "You'll stay fer
dinner." He pointed toward the house. "You'll find Miz T. in the
kitchen. If you want to wash up, she'll show you."

The ranch hand was leading her horse toward the barn. "But," objected
Patty, "I didn't mean to run in like this just at meal time. Mrs.
Thompson won't be expecting a guest, and I brought a lunch with me."

Thompson laughed: "You must be a pilgrim in these parts," he said.
"Most folks would ride half a day to git here 'round feedin' time. We
always count on two or three extry, so I guess they'll be a-plenty."
The man's laugh was infectious, and Patty found herself smiling. She
liked him from the first. There was a ponderous heartiness about him,
and she liked the way his little brown eyes sparkled from out their
network of sun-browned wrinkles. "You trot along in, now, an' tell Miz
T. she can begin dishin' up whenever she likes. We'll be 'long
d'rectly. They'll be plenty time to talk horse after we've et. My work
teams earns a good hour of noonin', an' I don't begrudge 'em an hour
an' a half, hot days."

Patty found Mrs. Thompson slight and quiet as her husband was big and
hearty. But her smile was as engaging as his, and an indefinable
something about her made the girl feel at home the moment she crossed
the threshold. "I came to see Mr. Thompson about a horse, and he
insisted that I stay to dinner," she apologized.

"Why, of course you'll stay to dinner. But you must be hot an' tired.
The wash dish is there beside the door. You better use it before
Thompson an' the hands comes, they always slosh everything all
up--they don't wash, they waller."

"Mr. Thompson said to tell you you could begin to dish up whenever
you're ready."

The woman smiled. "Yes, an' have everythin' set an' git cold, while
they feed the horses an' then like's not, stand 'round a spell an'
size up the hay stack, er mebbe mend a piece of harness or somethin'.
I guess you ain't married, er you wouldn't expect a man to meals 'til
you see him comin'. Seems like no matter how hungry they be, if they's
some little odd job they can find to do just when you get the grub set
on, they pick that time to do it. 'Specially if it's somethin' that
don't 'mount to anythin', an' like's not's b'en layin' 'round in plain
sight a week."

Patty laughingly admitted she was not married. "But, I'd teach 'em a
lesson," she said. "I'd put the things on and let them get cold."

The older woman smiled, and at the sound of voices, peered out the
door: "Here they come now," she said, and proceeded to carry heaping
vegetable dishes and a steaming platter of savory boiled meat from the
stove to the table. There was a prodigious splashing outside the door
and a moment later Thompson appeared, followed by his two ranch hands,
hair wet and shining, plastered tightly to their scalps, and faces
aglow from vigorous scrubbing. "You mind Mr. Sinclair, that used to
prospect in the hills," introduced Mrs. Thompson; "this is his
daughter."

Her husband bowed awkwardly: "Glad to know you. We know'd yer
paw--used to stop now an' again on his way to town. He was a smart
man. Liked to talk to him. He'd be'n all over." The man turned his
attention to his plate and the meal proceeded in solemn silence to its
conclusion. The two ranch hands arose and disappeared through the
door, and tilting back in his chair Thompson produced a match from his
pocket, and proceeded to whittle it into a toothpick. "I heard in town
how you was out in the hills," he began. "They said yer paw went back
East--" he paused as if uncertain how to proceed.

Patty nodded: "Yes, he went back home, and this spring he died. He
told me he had made a strike and I came out here to locate it."

The kindly brown eyes regarded her intently: "Ever do any
prospectin'?"

"No. This is my first experience."

"I never, either. But, if I was you I'd kind of have an eye on my
neighbors."

"You mean--the Wattses?" asked the girl in surprise.

The brown eyes were twinkling again: "No, Watts, he's all right! Only
trouble with Watts is he sets an' herds the sun all day. But, they's
others besides Watts in the hills."

"Yes," answered the girl, quickly, "I know. And that is the reason I
came to see you about a horse."

"What's the matter with the one you got?"

"Nothing at all. He seems to be a good horse. He's fast too, when I
want to crowd him. But, I need another just as good and as fast as he
is. Have you one you will sell?"

"I'll sell anything I got, if the price is right," smiled the man.

Patty regarded him thoughtfully: "I haven't very much money," she
said. "How much is he worth?"

Thompson considered: "A horse ain't like a cow-brute. There ain't no
regular market price. Horses is worth just as much as you can get
folks to pay fer 'em. But it looks like one horse ort to be enough to
prospect 'round the hills on."

"It isn't that," explained the girl. "If I buy him I shall try to
arrange with you to leave him right here where I can get him at a
moment's notice. I shall probably never need him but once, but when I
do, I shall need him badly." She paused, but without comment the man
waited for her to proceed: "I believe I am being followed, and if I
am, when I locate the claim, I am going to have to race for the
register's office."

Thompson leaned forward upon the table and chewed his toothpick
rapidly: "By Gosh, an' you want to have a fresh horse here for a
change!" he exclaimed, his eyes beaming approval.

"Exactly. Have you got the horse?"

The man nodded: "You bet I've got the horse! I've got a horse out
there in the corral that'll run rings around anythin' in this country
unless it's that there buckskin of Vil Holland's--an' I guess you
ain't goin' to have no call to race him."

Patty was on the point of exclaiming that the buckskin was the very
horse she would have to race, but instead she smiled: "But, if your
horse started fresh from here, and even Vil Holland's horse had run
clear from the mountains, this one could beat him to town, couldn't
he?"

"Could do it on three legs," laughed the man.

"How much do you ask for him?" The girl waited breathless, thinking of
her diminishing bank account.

Thompson's brow wrinkled: "I hold Lightnin' pretty high," he said,
after a pause. "You see, some of us ranchers is holdin' a fast horse
handy, a-waitin' fer word from the hills--an' when it comes, they's
goin' to be the biggest horse-thief round-up the hill country ever
seen. An' unless I miss my guess they'll be some that's carried their
nose pretty high that's goin' to snap down on the end of a tight one."

"Now, Thompson, what's the use of talkin' like that? Them things is
bad enough to have to do, let alone set around an' talk about 'em.
Anyone'd think you took pleasure in hangin' folks."

"I would--some folks."

The little woman turned to Patty: "He's just a-talkin'. Chances is, if
it come to hangin', Thompson would be the one to try an' talk 'em out
of it. Why, he won't even brand his own colts an' calves--makes the
hands do it."

"That's different," defended the man. "They're little an' young an'
they ain't never done nothin' ornery."

"But you haven't told me how much you want for your horse," persisted
the girl.

"Now just you listen to me a minute. I don't want to sell that horse,
an' there ain't no mortal use of you buyin' him. He's always
here--right in the corral when he ain't in the stable, an' either
place, all you got to do is throw yer kak on him an' fog it."

The girl stared at him in surprise: "You mean----"

"I mean that you're plumb welcome to use Lightnin' whenever you need
him. An' if they's anything else I can do to help you beat out any
ornery cuss that'd try an' hornswaggle you out of yer claim, you can
count on me doin' it! An' whether you know it 'er not, I ain't the
only one you can count on in a pinch neither." The man waved her
thanks aside with a sweep of a big hand, and rose from the table. "Miz
T. an' me'd like fer you to stop in whenever you feel like----"

"Yes, indeed, we would," seconded the little woman. "Couldn't you come
over an' bring yer sewin' some day?"

Patty laughed: "I'm afraid I haven't much sewing to bring, but I'll
come and spend the day with you some time. I'd love to."

The girl rode homeward with a lighter heart than she had known in some
time. "Now let him follow me all he wants to," she muttered. "But I
wonder why Mr. Thompson said I wouldn't have to race the buckskin. And
who did he mean I could count on in a pinch--Watts, I guess, or maybe
he meant Mr. Bethune."

As she saddled her horse next morning, Bethune presented himself at
the cabin. "Where away?" he smiled as he rode close, and swung
lightly to the ground.

"Into the hills," she answered, "in search of my father's lost mine."

The man's expression became suddenly grave: "Do you know, Miss
Sinclair, I hate to think of your riding these hills alone."

Patty glanced at him in surprise: "Why?"

"There are several reasons. For instance, one never knows what will
happen--a misstep on a dangerous trail--a broken cinch--any one of a
hundred things may happen in the wilds that mean death or serious
injury, even to the initiated. And the danger is tenfold in the case
of a tender-foot."

The girl laughed: "Thank you. But, if anything is going to happen,
it's going to happen. At least, I am in no danger from being run down
by a street car or an automobile. And I can't be blown up by a gas
explosion, or fall into a coal hole."

"But there are other dangers," persisted the man. "A woman, alone in
the hills--especially you."

"Why 'especially me'? Plenty of women have lived alone before in
places more dangerous than this, and have gotten along very well,
too. You men are conceited. You think there can be no possible safety
unless members of your own sex are at the helm of every undertaking or
enterprise. But you are wrong."

Bethune shook his head: "But I have reason to believe that there is at
least one person in these hills who believes you possess the secret of
your father's strike--and who would stop at nothing to obtain that
secret."

"I suppose you mean Vil Holland. I agree that he does seem to take
more than a passing interest in my comings and goings. But he doesn't
seem very fierce. Anyhow, I am not in the least afraid of him."

"What do you mean that he seems to take an interest in your comings
and goings?" The question seemed a bit eager. "Surely he has not been
following you!"

"Hasn't he? Then possibly you can tell me who has?"

"The scoundrel! And when you discover the lode he'll wait 'til you
have set your stakes and posted your notice, and have gotten out of
sight, and then he'll drive in his own stakes, stick up his own notice
beside them and beat you to the register."

Patty laughed: "Race me, you mean. He won't beat me. Remember, I shall
have at least a half-hour's start."

"A half-hour!" exclaimed Bethune. "And what is a half-hour in a
fifty-mile race against that buckskin. Why, my dear girl, with all due
respect for that horse of yours, Vil Holland's horse could give you
two hours' start and beat you to the railroad."

"Maybe," smiled the girl. "But he's going to have to do it--that is,
if I ever locate the lode."

"Ah, that is the point, exactly. It is that that brings me here. Not
that alone," he hastened to add. "For I would ride far any day to
spend a few moments with so charming a lady--and indeed, I should not
have delayed my visit this long but for some urgent business to the
northward. At all events, I'm here, and here I shall stay until,
together, we have solved our mystery of the hills."

The girl glanced into the face alight with boyish enthusiasm, and felt
irresistibly impelled to take this man into her confidence--to enlist
his help in the working out of her unintelligible map, and to admit
him to full partnership in her undertaking. There would be enough for
both if they succeeded in uncovering the lode. Her father had
intended that he should share in his mine. She recalled his eulogy of
her father, and his frank admission that there had been no agreement
of partnership. If anyone ever had the appearance of perfect sincerity
and candor this man had. She remembered her seriously depleted bank
account. Bethune had money, and in case the search should prove
long--Suddenly the words of Vil Holland flashed into her brain with
startling abruptness: "Remember yer dad knew enough to play a lone
hand." And again. "Did yer dad tell you about this partnership?" And
the significant emphasis he placed upon the "Oh," when she had
answered in the negative.

Bethune evidently had taken her silence for assent. He was speaking
again: "The first thing to do is to find the starting point on the map
and work it out step by step, then when we locate the lode, you and
Clen and I will file the first three claims, and we'll file all the
Wattses on the adjoining claims. That will give us absolute control of
a big block of what is probably a most valuable property."

Again Bethune had referred directly to the map which she had never
admitted she possessed. He had not said, "If you have a map." The
man's assumption angered her: "You still persist in assuming that I
have a map," she answered. "As a matter of fact, I'm depending
entirely upon a photograph. I am riding blindly through the hills
trying to find the spot that tallies with the picture."

Bethune frowned and shook his head doubtfully: "You might ride the
hills for years, and pass the spot a dozen times and never recognize
it. If you do not happen to strike the exact view-point you might
easily fail to recognize it. Then, too, the landscape changes with the
seasons of the year. However," his face brightened and the smile
returned to his lips; "we have at least something to go on. We are not
absolutely in the dark. Who knows? If the goddess of luck sits upon
our shoulders, I myself may know the place well--may recognize it
instantly! For years I have ridden these hills and I flatter myself
that no one knows their hidden nooks and byways better than I. Even if
I should not know the exact spot, it may be that I can tell by the
general features its approximate locality, and thus limit our search
to a comparatively small area."

Patty knew that her refusal to show the photograph could not fail to
place her in an unfavorable position. Either she would appear to
distrust this man whom she had no reason to distrust, or her action
would be attributed to a selfish intention to keep the secret to
herself, even though she knew she could only file one claim. The man's
argument had been entirely reasonable--in fact, it seemed the sensible
thing to do. Nevertheless, she did refuse, and refuse flatly: "I
think, Mr. Bethune, that I would rather play a lone hand. You see, I
started in on this thing alone, and I want to see it through--for the
present, at least. After a while, if I find that I cannot succeed
alone, I shall be glad of your assistance. I suppose you think me a
fool, but it's a matter of pride, I guess."

Was it fancy, or did the black eyes flash a gleam of hate--a glitter
of rage beneath their long up-curving lashes? And did the swarthy face
flush a shade darker beneath its tan? Patty could not be sure, for the
next moment he was speaking in a voice under perfect control: "I can
well understand your feeling in the matter, Miss Sinclair, and I have
nothing of reproach. I do think you are making a mistake. With Vil
Holland knowing what he does of your father's operations, time may be
a vital factor in the success of your undertaking. Let me caution you
again against carrying the photograph upon your person."

"Oh, I keep that safely hidden where no one would ever think of
searching for it," smiled the girl, and Bethune noted that her eyes
involuntarily swept the cabin with a glance.

The man mounted: "I will no longer keep you from your work," he said.
"I have arranged to spend the summer in the hills where I shall carry
on some prospecting upon my own account. If I can be of any assistance
to you--if you should need any advice, or help of any kind, a word
will procure it. I shall stop in occasionally to see how you fare.
Good-bye." He waved his hand and rode off down the creek where, in a
cottonwood thicket he dismounted and watched the girl ride away in the
opposite direction, noted that Lord Clendenning swung stealthily, into
the trail behind her, and swinging into his saddle rode swiftly toward
the cabin.

In his high notch in the hills, Vil Holland chuckled audibly, and
catching up his horse, headed for his camp.


CHAPTER X

THE BISHOP OF ALL OUTDOORS


The days slipped into weeks, as Patty Sinclair, carefully and
methodically traced valleys to their sources, and explored innumerable
coulees and ravines that twisted and turned their tortuous lengths
into the very heart of the hills. Rock ledges without number she
scanned, many with deep cracks and fissures, and many without them.
But not once did she find a ledge that could by any stretch of the
imagination be regarded as the ledge of the photograph. Disheartened,
but not discouraged, the girl would return each evening to her
solitary cabin, eat her solitary meal, and throw herself upon her bunk
to brood over the apparent hopelessness of her enterprise, or to read
from the thumbed and tattered magazines of the dispossessed sheep
herder. She rode, now, with a sort of dogged persistence. There was
none of the wild thrill that, during the first days of her search,
she experienced each time she topped a new divide, or entered a new
valley.

Three times since she had informed him she would play a lone hand in
the search for her father's strike, Bethune had called at the cabin.
And not once had he alluded to the progress of her work. She was
thankful to him for that--she had not forgotten the hurt in her
father's eyes as the taunting questions of the scoffers struck home.
Always she had known of the hurt, but now, with the disheartening days
of her own failure heaping themselves upon her, she was beginning to
understand the reason for the hurt. And, guessing this, Bethune
refrained from questioning, but talked gaily of books, and sunsets,
and of life, and love, and the joy of living. A supreme optimist, she
thought him, despite the half-veiled cynicism that threaded his
somewhat fatalistic view of life, a cynicism that but added the
necessary _sauce piquante_ to so abandoned an optimism.

Above all, the man was a gentleman. His speech held nothing of the
abrupt bluntness of Vil Holland's. He would appear shortly after her
early supper, and was always well upon his way before the late
darkness began to obscure the contours of her little valley. An hour's
chat upon the doorstep of the cabin and he was gone--riding down the
valley, singing as he rode some old _chanson_ of his French forebears,
with always a pause at the cottonwood grove for a farewell wave of his
hat. And Patty would turn from the doorway, and light her lamp, and
proceed to enjoy the small present which he never failed to leave in
her hand--a box of bon-bons of a kind she had vainly sought for in the
little town--again, a novel, a woman's novel written by a man who
thought he knew--and another time, just a handful of wild flowers
gathered in the hills. She ate the candy making it last over several
days. She read the book from cover to cover as she lay upon her air
mattress, tucked snugly between her blankets. And she arranged the
wild flowers loosely in a shallow bowl and watered them, and talked to
them, and admired their beauty, and when they were wilted she threw
them out, but she did not gather more flowers to fill the bowl,
instead she wiped it dry and returned it to its shelf in the
cupboard--and wondered when Bethune would come again. She admitted to
herself that he interested--at least, amused her--helped her to throw
off for the moment the spirit of dull depression that had fastened
itself upon her like a tangible thing, bearing down upon her,
threatening to crush her with its weight.

Always, during these brief visits, her lurking distrust of him
vanished in the frank boyishness of his personality. The incidents
that had engendered the distrust--the substitution of the name Schultz
for Schmidt in the matter of the horse pasture, his abrupt warning
against Vil Holland, and his attempt to be admitted into her
confidence as a matter of right, were for the moment forgotten in the
spell of his presence--but always during her lonely rides in the
hills, the half-formed doubt returned. Pondering the doubt, she
realized that the principal reason for its continued existence was not
so much in the incidents that had awakened it, as in the simple
question asked by Vil Holland: "You say your dad told you all about
this partnership business?" And in the "Oh," with which he had greeted
the reply that she had it from the lips of Bethune. With the
realization, her dislike for Vil Holland increased. She characterized
him as a "jug-guzzler," a "swashbuckler," and a "ruffian"--and smiled
as she recalled the picturesque figure with the clean-cut, bronzed
face. "Oh, I don't know--I hate these hills! Nobody seems sincere
excepting the Wattses, and they're--impossible!"

She had borrowed Watts's team and made a second trip to town for
supplies, and the check that she drew in payment cut her bank account
in half. As before she had offered to take Microby Dandeline, but the
girl declined to go, giving as an excuse that "pitcher shows wasn't as
good as circusts, an' they wasn't no fights, an' she didn't like
towns, nohow."

Upon her return from town Patty stopped at the Thompsons' for dinner
where she was accorded a royal welcome by the genial rancher and his
wife, and where also, she met the Reverend Len Christie, the most
picturesque, and the most un-clerical minister of the gospel she had
ever seen. To all appearances the man might have been a cowboy. He
affected chaps of yellow hair, a dark blue flannel shirt, against
which flamed a scarf of brilliant crimson caught together by means of
a vivid green scarab. He wore a roll brimmed Stetson, and carried a
six-gun at his belt. A pair of high-heeled boots added a couple of
inches to the six feet two that nature had provided him with, and he
shook hands as though he enjoyed shaking hands. "I've heard of you,
Miss Sinclair, back in town and have looked forward to meeting you on
my first trip into the hills. How are my friends, the Wattses, these
days? And that reprobate, Vil Holland?" He did not mention that it was
Vil Holland who had spoken of her presence in the hills, nor that the
cowboy had also specified that she utterly despised the ground he rode
on.

To her surprise Patty noticed that there was affection rather than
disapprobation in the word reprobate, and she answered a trifle
stiffly: "The Wattses are all well, I think: but, as for Mr. Holland,
I really cannot answer."

The parson appeared not to notice the constraint but turned to
Thompson: "By the way, Tom, why isn't Vil riding the round-up this
year? Has he made his strike?"

Thompson grinned: "Naw, Vil ain't made no strike. Facts is, they's
be'n some considerable horse liftin' goin' on lately, an' the
stockmen's payin' Vil wages fer to keep his eye peeled. He's out in
the hills all the time anyhow with his prospectin', an' they figger
the thieves won't pay no 'tention to him, like if a stranger was to
begin kihootin' 'round out there."

"Have they got a line on 'em at all?"

"Well," considered Thompson. "Not as I know of--exactly. Monk Bethune
an' that there Lord Clendennin' is hangin' 'round the hills--that's
about all I know."

The parson nodded: "I saw Bethune in town the other day. Do you know,
Tom, I believe there's a bad Injun."

"Indian!" cried the girl. "Mr. Bethune is not an Indian!"

Thompson laughed: "Yup, that is, he's a breed. They say his
gran'mother was a Cree squaw--daughter of a chief, or somethin'.
Anyways, this here Monk, he's a pretty slick article, I guess."

"They're apt to be worse than either the whites or the Indians,"
Christie explained. "And this Monk Bethune is an educated man, which
should make him doubly dangerous. Well, I must be going. I've got to
ride clear over onto Big Porcupine. I heard that old man Samuelson's
very sick. There's a good man--old Samuelson. Hope he'll pull
through."

"You bet he's a good man!" assented Thompson, warmly. "He seen Bill
Winters through, when they tried to prove the murder of Jack Bronson
onto him, an' it cost him a thousan' dollars. The districk attorney
had it in fer Bill, count of him courtin' his gal."

"Yes, and I could tell of a dozen things the old man has done for
people that nobody but I ever knew about--in some instances even the
people themselves didn't know." He turned to Patty: "Good-by, Miss
Sinclair. I'm mighty glad to have met you. I knew your father very
well. If you see the Wattses, tell them I shall try and swing around
that way on my return." The parson mounted a raw-boned, Roman-nosed
pinto, whose vivid calico markings, together with the rider's
brilliant scarf gave a most unministerial, not to say bizarre effect
to the outfit. "So long, Tom," he called.

"So long, Len! If they's anything we can do, let us know. An' be sure
an' stop in comin' back." Thompson watched the man until he vanished
in a cloud of dust far out on the trail.

"Best doggone preacher ever was born," he vouchsafed. "He can ride,
an' shoot, an' rope, an' everything a man ort to. An' if anyone's
sick! Well, he's worth all the doctors an' nurses in the State of
Montany. He'll make you git well just 'cause he wants you to. An' they
ain't nothin' too much trouble--an' they ain't no work too hard for
him to tackle. There ain't no piousness stickin' out on him fer folks
to hang their hat on, neither. He'll mix with the boys, an' listen to
the natural cussin' an' swearin' that goes on wherever cattle's
handled, an' enjoy it--but just you let some shorthorn start what you
might call vicious or premeditated cussin'--somethin' special wicked
or vile, an' he'll find out there's a parson in the crowd right quick,
an' if he don't shut up, chances is, he'll be spittin' out a couple of
teeth. There's one parson can fight, an' the boys know it, an' what's
more they know he _will_ fight--an' they ain't one of 'em that
wouldn't back up his play, neither. An' preach! Why he can tear loose
an' make you feel sorry for every mean trick you ever done--not for
fear of any punishment after yer dead--but just because it wasn't
playin' the game. That's him, every time. An' he ain't always
hollerin' about hell--hearin' him preach you wouldn't hardly know they
was a hell. 'The Bishop of All Outdoors,' they call him--an' they say
he can go back East an' preach to city folks, an' make 'em set up an'
take notice, same as out here. He's be'n offered three times what he
gets here to go where he'd have it ten times easier--but he laughs at
'em. He sure is one preacher that ain't afraid of work!"

As Watts's team plodded the hot miles of the interminable trail
Patty's brain revolved wearily about its problem. "I've made almost a
complete circle of the cabin, and I haven't found the rock ledge with
the crack in it yet--and as for daddy's old map--I've spent _hours_
trying to figure out what that jumble of letters and numbers mean,
I'll just have to start all over again and keep reaching farther and
farther into the hills on my rides. Mr. Bethune said I might not
recognize the place when I come to it!" she laughed bitterly. "If he
knew how that photograph has burned itself into my brain! I can close
my eyes and see that rock wall with its peculiar crack, and the
rock-strewn valley, and the lone tree--_recognize_ it! I would know it
in the dark!"

Her eyes rested upon the various packages of her load of supplies.
"One more trip to town, and my prospecting is done, at least, until I
can earn some more money. The prices out here are outrageous. It's the
freight, the man told me. Five cents' freight on a penny's worth of
food! But what in the world can I do to make money? What can anybody
do to make money in this Godforsaken country? I can't punch cattle,
nor herd sheep. I don't see why I had to be a _girl_!" Resentment
against her accident of birth cooled, and her mind again took up its
burden of thought. "There is one way," she muttered. "And that is to
admit failure and take Mr. Bethune into partnership. He will advance
the money and help with the work--and, surely there will be enough for
two. And, I'm not so sure but that--" She broke off shortly and felt
the hot blood rise in a furious blush, as she glanced guiltily about
her--but in all the vast stretch of plain was no human being, and she
laughed aloud at the antics of the prairie dogs that scolded and
barked saucily and then dove precipitously into their holes as a lean
coyote trotted diagonally through their "town."

What was it they had said at Thompson's about Mr. Bethune? Despite
herself she had approved the outlandishly dressed preacher with the
smiling blue eyes. He was so big, and so wholesome! "The Bishop of All
Outdoors," Thompson had called him. She liked that--and somehow the
name seemed to fit. Looking into those eyes no one could doubt his
sincerity--his every word, his every motion spoke unbounded enthusiasm
for his work. What was it he had said? "Do you know, Tom, I believe
there's a bad Injun." And Thompson had referred to Bethune as "a
pretty slick article." Surely, Thompson, whole-souled, generous
Thompson, would not malign a man. Here were two men whom the girl knew
instinctively she could trust, who stood four-square with the world,
and whose opinions must carry weight. And both had spoken with
suspicion of Bethune and both had spoken of Vil Holland as one of
themselves. "I don't understand it," she muttered. "Everybody seems to
be against Mr. Bethune, and everybody seems to like Vil Holland, in
spite of his jug, and his gun, and his boorishness. Maybe it's because
Mr. Bethune's a--a breed," she speculated. "Why, they even hinted that
he's a--a horse-thief. It isn't fair to despise him for his Indian
blood. Why should he be made to suffer because his grandmother was an
Indian--the daughter of a Cree chief? It sounds interesting and
romantic. The people of some of our very best families point with
pride to the fact that they are descendants of Pocahontas! Poor
fellow, everybody seems down on him--everybody that is, but Ma Watts
and Microby. And, as a matter of fact, he appears to better advantage
than any of them, not excepting the very militant and unorthodox
'Bishop of All Outdoors.'"

The result of the girl's cogitations left her exactly where she
started. She was no nearer the solution of her problem of the hills.
And her lurking doubt of Bethune still remained despite the excuses
she invented to account for his unpopularity, nor had her opinion of
Vil Holland been altered in the least.

Upon arriving at her cabin she was not at all surprised to find that
it had been thoroughly searched, albeit with less care than the
searcher had been in the habit of bestowing upon the readjustment of
the various objects of the room exactly as she had left them. Canned
goods and dishes were disarranged upon their shelves, and the loose
section of floor board beneath her bunk that had evidently served as
the secret _cache_ of the sheep herder, had been fitted clumsily into
its place. The evident boldness, or carelessness of this latest
outrage angered her as no previous search had done. Heretofore each
object had been returned to its place with painstaking accuracy so
that it had been only through the use of fine-spun cobwebs and
carefully arranged bits of dust that she had been able to verify her
suspicion that the room had really been searched--and there had been
times when even the dust and the cobwebs had been replaced. Whoever
had been searching the cabin had proven himself a master of detail,
and had at least, paid her the compliment of possessing imagination,
and a shrewdness equaling his own. Was it possible that the searcher,
emboldened by her repeated failure to spy upon him at his work, had
ceased to care whether or not she knew of his visits? The girl
recalled the three weary days she had spent watching from the
hillside. And how she had decided to buy a lock for her door, until
the futility of it had been brought home to her by the discovery that
her trunks were being searched along with her other belongings, and
their locks left in perfect condition. So far, he might well scorn her
puny attempts at discovery. Or, had a new factor entered the game? Had
someone of cruder mold undertaken to discover her secret? The thought
gave her a decided uneasiness. Tired out by her trip, she did not
light the fire, and after disposing of the cold lunch Mrs. Thompson
had put up for her, affixed the bar, and went to bed, with her six-gun
within reach of her hand.

For a long time she lay in the darkness, thinking. "The way it was
before, I haven't been in any physical danger. Mr. Vil Holland knows
that if what he is searching for is not here I must carry it on my
person. The obvious way to get it would be to take it away from me. Of
course the only way he could do that without my seeing him would be to
kill me. He hesitates at murder. Either there are depths of moral
turpitude into which he will not descend--or, he fears the
consequences. He has imagination. He assumes that sometime I'll leave
that packet at home--either through carelessness, or because I have
learned its contents by heart and don't need it. In the meantime, in
addition to his patient searching of the cabin, he is taking no
chances, and while he waits for the inevitable to happen he is
following me so if I do succeed in locating the claim, he can beat me
to the register. It's a pretty game--no violence--only patience and
brains. But this other," she shuddered, "there is something positively
brutal in the crude awkwardness of his work. If he thinks I carry what
he wants with me, would he hesitate at murder? I guess I'll have to
carry that gun again--and I better practice with it, too. If I can
only get rid of this last one, I believe I've got a scheme for
catching the other!" She sat bolt upright in bed. "Oh, if I only
could! If I could only beat him at his own game--and I believe I can!"
For several minutes she sat thinking rapidly, and as she lay back upon
her pillow, she smiled.


CHAPTER XI

LORD CLENDENNING GETS A DUCKING


Patty awoke at dawn and dressed hurriedly. Shivering in the chill air,
she lighted a match and pushed back a lid of the little cast iron cook
stove. Instead of the "cold fire" of neatly arranged wood and
kindlings that she had built before leaving for town a pile of gray
ashes and blackened ends of charcoal greeted her.

"Whoever it was knew he had plenty of time at his disposal so he
helped himself to a meal," she muttered angrily. "He might, at least,
have cut me some kindlings. I'm surprised that he had the good grace
to wash up his dirty dishes." A few moments later, as the fire
crackled merrily in the stove, she picked up the water pail and
stepping through the door, threw back her head and breathed deeply of
the crisp mountain air. "Oh, it's wonderful just to be alive!" she
whispered. "Even if everybody is against you. It's just like a great
big game and, oh, I want to win! I've got to win!" she added, grimly,
as her thoughts flew to her depleted bank account.

At the spring she paused in the act of filling her pail and stared at
a mark in the mud at the edge of the tiny rill formed by the overflow
from the catch basin. She leaned over and examined the mark more
closely. It was the track of a bare foot. Then, for the first time in
many days, the girl threw back her head and laughed. "Microby
Dandeline!" she cried. "And I was picturing some skulking murderer
lying in wait to pounce on me at the first opportunity. And here it
was only poor little Microby who happened along, and with her natural
curiosity pawed over everything in the cabin, and then decided it
would be a grand stunt to cook herself a meal and eat it at my
table--and I haven't the least doubt that she arrayed herself in one
of my dresses when she did it." Patty hummed a light tune as, water
pail in hand, she made her way up the path to the cabin. "Whee! but
it's a relief to feel that I won't have to ride these hills peering
behind every tree and rock for a lurking assassin. And I won't have to
carry that horrid heavy old gun, either."

After breakfast she saddled her horse and headed up the ravine that
she had followed upon the morning of her first ride. At the top of the
divide she pulled up her horse and gazed downward at the little cabin.
As before she was impressed by the startling distinctness with which
each object was visible. "Anyway, I'm glad my window is not on this
side," she muttered, as her eyes strayed to the ground at her horse's
feet. For yards around, the buffalo grass had been trampled and pawed
until scarcely a spear remained. "Here's where he watches me start out
each morning, then he follows me until he's sure I'm well away from
the valley, then he slips back and searches the cabin, and then takes
up my trail again. The miserable sneak!" she cried, angrily. "If Mr.
Thompson, and Watts, and that cowboy preacher knew what I knew about
him, they wouldn't seem so impressed with him. Anyway," she added,
defiantly, "Mr. Bethune and Lord Clendenning know him for what he
is-and so do I."

It was in a very wrathful mood that she turned her horse's head and
struck into the timber, being careful to avoid Vil Holland's camp by a
wide margin. Crossing the timbered plateau, she topped a low divide
and found herself at the head of a deep, rocky valley, whose course
she could trace for miles as it wound in and out among the far hills.
Giving her horse his head, she began the descent of the valley,
scanning its sides carefully as the animal picked his way slowly among
the rock fragments and patches of scrub timber that littered its
floor. She had proceeded for perhaps an hour when, in passing the
mouth of a ravine that slanted sharply into the hills, she was
startled by a rattling of loose stones, and a horse and rider emerged
almost directly into her path. The next moment Vil Holland raised the
Stetson from his head and addressed her gravely: "Good mornin' Miss
Sinclair, I sure didn't mean to come out on you sudden, that way, but
Buck slipped on the rocks an' we come mighty near pilin' up."

"It is about the first slip you've made, isn't it?" Patty answered,
acidly. "Possibly if you'd left your jug at home you wouldn't have
made that."

"Oh no. We've slipped before. Fact is, we've been into about every
kind of a jack-pot the hills can deal. We rolled half way down a
mountain once, an' barrin' a little skinnin' up, we come out of it all
to the good. But it ain't the jug. Buck don't drink. It's surprisin'
what a good habited horse he is. He's a heap better'n most folks."
The man spoke gravely, with no hint of sarcasm in his tone, and Patty
sniffed. He appeared not to notice. "How you comin' on with the
prospectin'? Found yer dad's claim yet?"

"You ought to know whether I have or not," she retorted, hotly.

"That's so. If you had, you wouldn't still be huntin' it, would you?"

"No. And if I had, I'd have had a nice little race on my hands to file
it, wouldn't I?"

"Well, I expect maybe you would. But that horse of yours is pretty
handy on his feet. Used to belong to Bob Smith--that's his brand--that
KN on the left shoulder."

"Yes," answered the girl, meaningly. "I understand there is only one
horse in the hills that could outrun him."

"Buck can. I won ten dollars off Bob one time. We run a mile, an' Buck
won, easy. But the best thing about Buck, he's a distance horse. He's
got the wind--an' he don't know what it means to quit. He could run
all day if he had to, couldn't you, Buck?" The man stroked the
buckskin's neck affectionately as he talked.

Patty's eyes glinted angrily: "The stakes would have to be pretty
high for you to run him, say, fifty miles, wouldn't they?"

"Yes. Pretty high," he repeated, and changed the subject abruptly.
"Must find it kind of lonesome out here in the hills, after livin' in
the East where there's lots of folks around all the time."

"Oh, not at all," answered the girl, quickly. "Some of my neighbors
are good enough to call on me once in a while--_when I am at home_.
And there is at least _one_ that calls very regularly when I am not at
home. He is a genius for detail--that one. Sharp eyes, and a light
touch. He's something of an expert in the matter of duplicate keys,
too. In any large city he should make a grand success--as a burglar.
It is really too bad that he's wasting his talents, here in the
hills."

"Maybe he figures that the stakes are higher, and the risk less--here
in the hills."

"Of course," sneered Patty. "And I must say his reasoning does him
credit. If he should succeed in burglarizing even the biggest bank in
the richest city, he could not expect to carry off a gold mine. And,
here in the hills, instead of burglar-proof devices and armed
policemen, he has only an unlocked cabin, and a woman to contend
with. Yes, the risk is far less here in the hills. His location speaks
well for his reasoning--if not for his courage."

"I suppose he figures that plenty of brutes have got courage, but only
humans can reason," answered the man, blandly. "But, ridin' out in the
hills this way--that must be a lonesome job."

"Not at all," she answered, in a voice that masked the anger against
the man who sat calmly baiting her. "In fact, I never ride alone. I
have an unseen escort, who accompanies me wherever I go. 'My guardian
devil of the hills' I call him, and even when I'm at home I know that
he is watching from his notch in the rim of the hills."

"Guardian devil," the man repeated. "That's pretty good." He did not
smile, in fact, Patty recalled, as she sat looking squarely into his
eyes, that she had never seen him smile--had never seen him express
any emotion. Without a trace of anger in tone or expression he had
ordered the grasping hotel-keeper about--and had been obeyed to the
letter. And without the slightest evidence of annoyance or displeasure
he had listened, upon several occasions to her own sarcastic outbursts
against him. Here was a man as devoid of emotion as a fish, or one
whose complete self-mastery was astounding. "Pretty good," he
repeated. "And does he know that you call him your 'guardian devil?'"

"Yes, I think he does--now," she answered, dryly. "By the way, Mr.
Holland, you do a good deal of riding about the hills, yourself."

"Yeh, prospectors are apt to. Then, there's other little matters of
interest here, too."

"Such as horse-thieving?" suggested the girl. "I heard you were paid
to run down a gang of horse-thieves. I was wondering when you found
time to earn your money."

"Yeh, there's some hair artists loose in the hills, an' some of the
outfits kind of wanted me to keep an eye out for 'em."

An old saw flashed into the girl's mind, and the comers of her mouth
drew into a sarcastic smile.

"'Settin' a thief to catch a thief,' is what you're thinkin'. We ain't
so well acquainted yet as what we will be--when you get your eye teeth
cut."

"I suppose our real acquaintance will begin when the game we are
playing comes to a show-down?" she sneered. "But let me tell you this,
if I win, our acquaintance will end, right where you think it will
begin!"

The cowboy nodded: "That's fair an' square. An' if I win--_you'll have
to be satisfied with what you get_. Good-day, I've fooled away time
enough already." And, with a word to his horse, Vil Holland
disappeared up the valley in the direction from which the girl had
come.

When her anger had cooled sufficiently, Patty smiled, a rather grim,
tight-lipped little smile. "If he wins I'll have to be satisfied with
what I get," she muttered. "At least, he's candid about it. I think,
now, Mr. Vil Holland and I understand each other perfectly."

Late in the afternoon she emerged from the mouth of her valley and,
crossing a familiar tongue of bench, found herself upon the trail near
the point of its intersection with Monte's Creek. Turning up the
creek, she stopped for a few minutes' chat with Ma Watts.

"Law sakes! Climb right down an' set a while. I wus sayin' to Watts
las' night how we-all hain't see nawthin' of yo' fer hit's goin' on a
couple of weeks 'cept yo' hirein' the team, an' not stoppin' in to
speak of, comin' er goin'. How be yo'? An' I 'spect yo' hain't found
yer pa's claim yet. I saved yo' up a dozen of aigs. Hed to mighty near
fight off that there Lord Clendennin' he wanted 'em so bad. But I
done tol' him yo' wus promised 'em, an' yo'd git 'em not nary nother.
So there they be, honey, all packed in a pail with hay so's they won't
break. No sir, I tol' him how he couldn't hev' 'em if he wus two
lords. An' all the time we wus a-augerin', Mr. Bethune an' Microby
Dandeline sot out yonder a-talkin' an' laughin', friendly as yo'
please." Ma Watts paused for breath and her eye fell upon her spouse,
who stood meekly beside the kitchen door. "Watts, where's yer manners?
Cain't yo' say 'howdy' to Mr. Sinclair's darter--an' her a-payin' yo'
good money fer rent an' fer team hire. Yo' ort to be 'shamed, standin'
gawpin' like a mud turkle. Folks 'ud think yo' hain't got good sense."

"I aimed to say 'howdy' first chanct I got." He shoved a chair toward
the girl. "Set down an' take hit easy a spell."

"Where is Microby?" she asked, refusing the proffered seat with a
smile, and leaning lightly against her saddle.

"Land sakes, I don't know! She's gittin' that no 'count, she goes
pokin' off somewhere's in the hills on Gee Dot. Says she's
a-prospectin'--like they all says when they're too lazy to do reg'lar
work."

"My father was a prospector," answered the girl, quickly, "and there
wasn't a lazy bone in his body. And I'm a prospector, and I'm sure I'm
not lazy."

"Law, there I went an' done hit!" exclaimed Ma Watts, contritely. "I
didn't mean no real honest-to-Gawd, reg'lar prospectors like yo' pa
wus, an' yo', an' Mr. Bethune. But there's that Vil Holland, he's a
cowpuncher, when he works, and a prospector when he don't. An' there's
Lord Clendennin', he's a prospector all the time, 'cause he don't
never work--an' that's the way hit goes. An' Microby Dandeline's
a-gittin' as triflin' as the rest. Mr. Bethune, he tellin' her how
she'd git rich ef she could find a gol' mind, an' how she could buy
her some fine clos' like yourn, an' go to the city to live like the
folks in the pitchers. Mr. Bethune, he's done found minds. He's rich.
An' he's got manners, too. Watts, he's allus makin' light of
manners--says they don't 'mount to nawthin'. But thet's 'cause he
hain't quality. Quality's got 'em, an' they're nice to hev."

"Gre't sight o' quality--him," growled Watts. "He's part Injun."

"Hit don't make no diff'ence what he's part!" defended the woman.
"He's rich, an' he's purty lookin', an' he's got manners like I done
tol' yo'. Ef I wus you I'd marry up with him, an----"

"Why, Mrs. Watts! What do you mean?" exclaimed the girl flushing with
annoyance.

"Jest what I be'n aimin' to tell yo' fer hit's goin' on quite a spell.
Yo'n him 'ud step hit off right pert. Yo' pretty, an' yo' rich, er yo'
will be when yo' find yo' pa's mind, an' yo' manners is most as good
as his'n."

The humor of the mountain woman's serious effort at match-making
struck Patty, and she interrupted with a laugh: "There are several
objections to that arrangement," she hastened to say. "In the first
place Mr. Bethune has never asked me to marry him. He may have serious
objections, and as for me, I'm not ready to even think of marrying."

"Don't take long to git ready, onct yo' git in the notion. An' I bet
Mr. Bethune hain't abuzzin' 'round up an' down this yere crick fer
nawthin'. Law sakes, child, when I tuk a notion to take Watts, come a
supper time I wusn't no more a mind to git married than yo' be, an',
by cracky! come moonrise me an' Watts had forked one o' pa's mewels
with nothin' on but a rope halter, an' wus headin' down the branch
with pa an' my brother Lafe a-cuttin' through the lau'ls with their
rifle-guns fer to head us off."

"Yo' didn't take me fer looks ner manners, neither," reminded Watts.

"Law, I'd a be'n single yet, ef I hed. No sir, I tuk yo' to save a
sight o' killin' that's what I done. Yo' see, Miss, my pa wus sot on
me not marryin' no Watts--not that I aimed to, 'til he says I dasn't.
But Watts hed be'n a pesterin' 'round right smart, nights, an' pa
lowed he'd shore kill him daid ef he didn't mind his own
business--so'd my brothers, they wus five of 'em, an' nary one that
wusn't mighty handy with his rifle-gun.

"So Watts, he quit a-comin' to the cabin, but me an' him made hit up
thet he'd hide out on t'other side o' the branch an' holler like a
owl, an' then I'd slip out the back do'--an' that's the way we done
our co'tin'. My folks didn't hev no truck with the Wattses thet lived
on t'other side the mountain, 'count of them killin' two Strunkses a
way back, the Strunkses bein' my pa's ma's folks, over a hawg. Even
then I didn't hev no notion o' marryin' Watts, jest done hit to be
a-doin' like, ontil pa an' the boys ketched on to whut we wus up to.
After thet, hit got so't every time they heerd a squinch owl holler,
they'd begin a-shootin' into the bresh with their rifle guns. Watts
lowed they was comin' doggone clust to him a time er two, an' how he
aimed to bring along his own gun some night, an' start a shootin'
back.

"Law knows wher it would ended, whut one with another, the Biggses an'
the Strunkses, an' the Rawlins, an' the Craborchards would hev be'n
drug into hit, along of the Wattses an' the Scrogginses. So I tuk
Watts, an' we went to live with his folks, an' we sent back the mewel
with Job Swenky, who they wouldn't nobody kill 'cause he wus a daftie.
An' pa brung back the mewel hisself, come alone, an' 'thouten his
rifle-gun. He says seem' how Watts hed got me fair an' squr, an' we
wus reg'lar married, he reckoned the ol' grudge wus dead, the
Strunkses wasn't no count much, nohow, an' we wus welcome to keep the
mewel to start on. So Watts's pa killed a shoat, an' brung out a big
jug o' corn whisky, an' we-all et an' drunk all we could hold, an'
from then on 'til whut time we come away from ther, they wusn't a man,
outside a couple o' revenoos, killed on B'ar Track.

"So yo' see," the woman continued, with a smile. "Hit don't take no
time to git ready, onct yo' git in the notion."

"I'm afraid I haven't the same provocation," Patty laughed, as she
picked up her pail of eggs and swung into the saddle. "Good-by, and be
sure and tell Microby Dandeline to come up and see me. Maybe she'd
like to come up on Sunday. I never ride on Sunday."

"She'll come fast enough," promised Ma Watts, and watched the
retreating girl until a bend of the creek carried her out of sight.

The long shadows of the mountains were slowly climbing the opposite
wall of the valley, as the girl rode leisurely up Monte's Creek. And
as she rode, she smiled: "Why is it that every married woman--and
especially the older ones, thinks it is her bounden duty to pounce
upon and marry off every single one? It is not one bit different out
here in the heart of the hills, than it is in Middleton, or New York.
And, it isn't because they're all so happy in their own marriages,
either. Look at old Mrs. Stratford, who was bound and determined that
I must marry that Archie Smith-Jones; she's been married four times,
and divorced three. And Archie never will amount to a row of pins. He
looks like a tailor's model, and acts like a Rolls-Royce. And, I
don't see any supreme bliss about Mrs. Watts's married existence,
although she's perfectly satisfied, I guess, poor thing. I love the
subtle finesse with which she tried to arrange a match between me and
Mr. Bethune. ''Ef I wus yo' I'd marry up with him'--just like that!
Shades of Mrs. Stratford who spent two whole months trying to get
Archie and me into the same canoe! And when she did, the blamed thing
tipped over and ruined the only decent summer things I had, all
because that fool Archie thought he had to stand up to fend the canoe
off the pier.... At least, Mr. Bethune has got some sense, and he is
good looking, and he seems to have money, and there is a certain dash
and verve about him that one would hardly expect to find here in the
hills--and yet--there's something--it isn't his Indian blood, I don't
care a cent about that--but sometimes, there's something about him
that makes me wonder if he's genuine."

She passed through the cottonwood grove and emerged into the open only
a few hundred yards below the sheep camp. A moment later she halted
abruptly and stared toward the cabin. Two saddled horses stood before
the door, reins hanging loosely, and upon the edge of a low cut-bank,
just below the shallow waters of the ford, two men were struggling,
locked in each other's embrace. Hastily the girl drew back into the
cover of the grove and watched with intense interest the two forms
that weaved precariously above the deep pool formed by a sudden bend
in the creek. The horses she recognized as Vil Holland's buckskin, and
the big, blaze-faced bay ridden by Lord Clendenning. In the gathering
dusk she could not make out the faces of the two men, but by their
heaving, circling, swaying figures she knew that mighty muscles were
being strained to their utmost, and that soon one or the other must
give in. A dozen questions flashed through the girl's brain. What were
they doing there? Why were they fighting at the very door of her
cabin? And, above all, what would be the outcome? Would one of them
kill the other? Would one of them be left maimed and bleeding for her
to bind up and coax back to life?

The men were on the very verge of the cut-bank, now, and it seemed
inevitable that both must go crashing into the creek. "Serve 'em right
if they would," muttered Patty, "I'd like to give 'em a push." One
aisle was crammed with provisions, another was littered with sick
and wounded, while in the centre a great number of helpless people
had taken up their abode, and had even lit their cooking fires
upon the mosaic floors. There were many at prayer, so I knelt in the
shadow of a pillar, and I prayed with all my heart that I might have
the good luck to get out of this scrape alive, and that I might do such
a deed that night as would make my name as famous in Spain as it
had already become in Germany. I waited until the clock struck
three, and then I left the cathedral and made my way toward the
Convent of the Madonna, where the assault was to be delivered.

You will understand, you who know me so well, that I was not the man
to return tamely to the French camp with the report that our agent
was dead and that other means must be found of entering the
city.
Either I should find some means to finish his uncompleted task or
there would be a vacancy for a senior captain in the Hussars of
Conflans.

I passed unquestioned down the broad boulevard, which I have already
described, until I came to the great stone convent which formed the
outwork of the defence.

It was built in a square with a garden in the centre.

In this garden some hundreds of men were assembled, all armed
and ready, for it was known, of course, within the town that this was
the point against which the French attack was likely to be made.
Up to this time our fighting all over Europe had always been done
between one army and another. It was only here in Spain that
we learned how terrible a thing it is to fight against a people.

On the one hand there is no glory, for what glory could be gained
by defeating this rabble of elderly shopkeepers, ignorant peasants,
fanatical priests, excited women, and all the other creatures who
made up the garrison?

On the other hand there were extreme discomfort and danger, for these
people would give you no rest, would observe no rules of war,
and were desperately earnest in their desire by hook or by crook to do
you an injury. I began to realise how odious was our task as I looked
upon the motley but ferocious groups who were gathered round the
watch-fires in the garden of the Convent of the Madonna. It was not
for us soldiers to think about politics, but from the beginning
there always seemed to be a curse upon this war in Spain.

However, at the moment I had no time to brood over such matters as
these.

There was, as I have said, no difficulty in getting as far as the
convent garden, but to pass inside the convent unquestioned was not
so easy.

The first thing which I did was to walk round the garden, and I was
soon able to pick out one large stained-glass window which must belong
to the chapel. I had understood from Hubert that the Mother Superior's
room, in which the powder was stored, was near to this, and that
the train had been laid through a hole in the wall from some
neighbouring cell. I must, at all costs, get into the convent. There
was a guard at the door, and how could I get in without explanations?
But a sudden inspiration showed me how the thing might be
done.

In the garden was a well, and beside the well were a number of empty
buckets. I filled two of these, and approached the door. The errand of
a man who carries a bucket of water in each hand does not
need to be explained. The guard opened to let me through. I found
myself in a long, stone-flagged corridor, lit with lanterns, with the
cells of the nuns leading out from one side of it. Now at last I
was on the high road to success. I walked on without hesitation, for I
knew by my observations in the garden which way to go for the
chapel.

A number of Spanish soldiers were lounging and smoking in the corridor,
several of whom addressed me as I passed.

I fancy it was for my blessing that they asked, and my "Ora pro nobis"
seemed to entirely satisfy them.

Soon I had got as far as the chapel, and it was easy enough to see that
the cell next door was used as a magazine, for the floor was all black
with powder in front of it. The door was shut, and two fierce-looking
fellows stood on guard outside it, one of them with a key stuck
in his belt. Had we been alone, it would not have been long before
it would have been in my hand, but with his comrade there it was
impossible for me to hope to take it by force.

The cell next door to the magazine on the far side from the chapel
must be the one which belonged to Sister Angela.

It was half open. I took my courage in both hands and, leaving my
buckets in the corridor, I walked unchallenged into the room.

I was prepared to find half a dozen fierce Spanish desperadoes within,
but what actually met my eyes was even more embarrassing. The room had
apparently been set aside for the use of some of the nuns, who for
some reason had refused to quit their home. Three of them were
within, one an elderly, stern-faced dame, who was evidently the Mother
Superior, the others, young ladies of charming appearance. They were
seated together at the far side of the room, but they all rose
at my entrance, and I saw with some amazement, by their manner and
expressions, that my coming was both welcome and expected.

In a moment my presence of mind had returned, and I saw exactly how
the matter lay.

Naturally, since an attack was about to be made upon the convent, these
sisters had been expecting to be directed to some place of safety.
Probably they were under vow not to quit the walls, and they had been
told to remain in this cell until they received further orders.

In any case I adapted my conduct to this supposition, since it was clear
that I must get them out of the room, and this would give me a
ready excuse to do so.

I first cast a glance at the door and observed that the key was
within. I then made a gesture to the nuns to follow me. The Mother
Superior asked me some question, but I shook my head impatiently
and beckoned to her again.

She hesitated, but I stamped my foot and called them forth in so
imperious a manner that they came at once.

They would be safer in the chapel, and thither I led them, placing them
at the end which was farthest from the magazine. As the three nuns
took their places before the altar my heart bounded with joy and
pride within me, for I felt that the last obstacle had been lifted
from my path.

And yet how often have I not found that that is the very moment of
danger? I took a last glance at the Mother Superior, and to my dismay
I saw that her piercing dark eyes were fixed, with an expression in
which surprise was deepening into suspicion, upon my right hand. There
were two points which might well have attracted her attention. One was
that it was red with the blood of the sentinel whom I had stabbed
in the tree.

That alone might count for little, as the knife was as familiar as
the breviary to the monks of Saragossa.

But on my forefinger I wore a heavy gold ring--the gift of a certain
German baroness whose name I may not mention. It shone brightly in the
light of the altar lamp.

Now, a ring upon a friar's hand is an impossibility, since they are
vowed to absolute poverty.

I turned quickly and made for the door of the chapel, but the mischief
was done. As I glanced back I saw that the Mother Superior was already
hurrying after me. I ran through the chapel door and along the corridor,
but she called out some shrill warning to the two guards in front.
Fortunately I had the presence of mind to call out also, and to
point down the passage as if we were both pursuing the same object.
Next instant I had dashed past them, sprang into the cell, slammed the
heavy door, and fastened it upon the inside.

With a bolt above and below and a huge lock in the centre it was a
piece of timber that would take some forcing.

Even now if they had had the wit to put a barrel of powder against the
door I should have been ruined. It was their only chance, for I had come to
the final stage of my adventure.

Here at last, after such a string of dangers as few men have ever
lived to talk of, I was at one end of the powder train, with the
Saragossa magazine at the other.

They were howling like wolves out in the passage, and muskets were
crashing against the door.

I paid no heed to their clamour, but I looked eagerly around for
that train of which Hubert had spoken.

Of course, it must be at the side of the room next to the magazine.

I crawled along it on my hands and knees, looking into every crevice,
but no sign could I see.

Two bullets flew through the door and flattened themselves against
the wall.

The thudding and smashing grew ever louder.

I saw a grey pile in a corner, flew to it with a cry of joy, and
found that it was only dust.
Then I got back to the side of the door where no bullets could ever
reach me--they were streaming freely into the room--and I tried to
forget this fiendish howling in my ear and to think out where this
train could be.

It must have been carefully laid by Hubert lest these nuns should see
it.

I tried to imagine how I should myself have arranged it had I
been in his place.

My eye was attracted by a statue of St. Joseph which stood in the corner.
There was a wreath of leaves along the edge of the pedestal, with a
lamp burning amidst them. I rushed across to it and tore the leaves
aside.

Yes, yes, there was a thin black line, which disappeared through
a small hole in the wall. I tilted over the lamp and threw myself on
the ground.
Next instant came a roar like thunder, the walls wavered and tottered
around me, the ceiling clattered down from above, and over the yell
of the terrified Spaniards was heard the terrific shout of the
storming column of Grenadiers. As in a dream--a happy dream--I heard
it, and then I heard no more.

When I came to my senses two French soldiers were propping me up, and
my head was singing like a kettle.

I staggered to my feet and looked around me. The plaster had fallen,
the furniture was scattered, and there were rents in the bricks,
but no signs of a breach. In fact, the walls of the convent had been
so solid that the explosion of the magazine had been insufficient
to throw them down.

On the other hand, it had caused such a panic among the defenders that
our stormers had been able to carry the windows and throw open the
doors almost without assistance. As I ran out into the corridor I
found it full of troops, and I met Marshal Lannes himself, who was
entering with his staff. He stopped and listened eagerly to my
story.

"Splendid, Captain Gerard, splendid!"

he cried.

"These facts will certainly be reported to the Emperor."
"I would suggest to your Excellency," said I, "that I have only
finished the work that was planned and carried out by Monsieur Hubert,
who gave his life for the cause."

"His services will not be forgotten," said the Marshal.

"Meanwhile, Captain Gerard, it is half-past four, and you must be starving
after such a night of exertion. My staff and I will breakfast inside
the city. I assure you that you will be an honoured guest."
"I will follow your Excellency," said I. "There is a small
engagement which detains me."
He opened his eyes.

"At this hour?"
"Yes, sir," I answered. "My fellow-officers, whom I never saw until last
night, will not be content unless they catch another glimpse of
me the first thing this morning."

"Au revoir, then," said Marshal Lannes, as he passed upon his way.

I hurried through the shattered door of the convent.

When I reached the roofless house in which we had held the consultation
the night before, I threw of my gown and I put on the busby and sabre
which I had left there.

Then, a Hussar once more, I hurried onward to the grove which was our
rendezvous. My brain was still reeling from the concussion of the
powder, and I was exhausted by the many emotions which had shaken
me during that terrible night.

It is like a dream, all that walk in the first dim grey light of
dawn, with the smouldering camp-fires around me and the buzz of the
waking army. Bugles and drums in every direction were mustering the
infantry, for the explosion and the shouting had told their own tale.
I strode onward until, as I entered the little clump of cork oaks
behind the horse lines, I saw my twelve comrades waiting in a group,
their sabres at their sides.

They looked at me curiously as I approached. Perhaps with my
powder-blackened face and my blood-stained hands I seemed a
different Gerard to the young captain whom they had made game of
the night before.

"Good morning, gentlemen," said I.

"I regret exceedingly if I have kept you waiting, but I have not been
master of my own time."
They said nothing, but they still scanned me with curious eyes.

I can see them now, standing in a line before me, tall men and short
men, stout men and thin men: Olivier, with his warlike moustache; the
thin, eager face of Pelletan; young Oudin, flushed by his first duel;
Mortier, with the sword-cut across his wrinkled brow.

I laid aside my busby and drew my sword.

"I have one favour to ask you, gentlemen," said I.

"Marshal Lannes has invited me to breakfast and I cannot keep
him waiting."

"What do you suggest?"

asked Major Olivier.

"That you release me from my promise to give you five minutes each,
and that you will permit me to attack you all together." I stood upon
my guard as I spoke.

But their answer was truly beautiful and truly French.

With one impulse the twelve swords flew from their scabbards and
were raised in salute.

There they stood, the twelve of them, motionless, their heels
together, each with his sword upright before his face.

I staggered back from them.

I looked from one to the other. For an instant I could not believe my
own eyes.

They were paying me homage, these, the men who had jeered me! Then
I understood it all.

I saw the effect that I had made upon them and their desire to make
reparation.
When a man is weak he can steel himself against danger, but not against
emotion.

"Comrades," I cried, "comrades--!" but I could say no more.

Something seemed to take me by the throat and choke me. And then in
an instant Olivier's arms were round me, Pelletan had seized me
by the right hand, Mortier by the left, some were patting me on the
shoulder, some were clapping me on the back, on every side smiling
faces were looking into mine; and so it was that I knew that I had
won my footing in the Hussars of Conflans.

III. How the Brigadier Slew the Fox [*]

[*] This story, already published in The Green Flag, is included here
so that all of the Brigadier Gerard stories may appear together.

In all the great hosts of France there was only one officer toward
whom the English of Wellington's Army retained a deep, steady, and
unchangeable hatred.

There were plunderers among the French, and men of violence, gamblers,
duellists, and roues.

All these could be forgiven, for others of their kidney were to be found
among the ranks of the English. But one officer of Massena's force
had committed a crime which was unspeakable, unheard of, abominable;
only to be alluded to with curses late in the evening, when a second
bottle had loosened the tongues of men. The news of it was carried
back to England, and country gentlemen who knew little of the details
of the war grew crimson with passion when they heard of it, and
yeomen of the shires raised freckled fists to Heaven and swore.

And yet who should be the doer of this dreadful deed but our
friend the Brigadier, Etienne Gerard, of the Hussars of Conflans,
gay-riding, plume-tossing, debonair, the darling of the ladies and
of the six brigades of light cavalry.

But the strange part of it is that this gallant gentleman did this
hateful thing, and made himself the most unpopular man in the
Peninsula, without ever knowing that he had done a crime for which
there is hardly a name amid all the resources of our language.

He died of old age, and never once in that imperturbable self-confidence
which adorned or disfigured his character knew that so many thousand
Englishmen would gladly have hanged him with their own hands. On
the contrary, he numbered this adventure among those other exploits
which he has given to the world, and many a time he chuckled and hugged
himself as he narrated it to the eager circle who gathered round
him in that humble cafe where, between his dinner and his dominoes, he
would tell, amid tears and laughter, of that inconceivable Napoleonic
past when France, like an angel of wrath, rose up, splendid and
terrible, before a cowering continent.

Let us listen to him as he tells the story in his own way and from his
own point of view.

You must know, my friends, said he, that it was toward the end of
the year eighteen hundred and ten that I and Massena and the others
pushed Wellington backward until we had hoped to drive him and his
army into the Tagus.

But when we were still twenty-five miles from Lisbon we found that
we were betrayed, for what had this Englishman done but build an
enormous line of works and forts at a place called Torres Vedras,
so that even we were unable to get through them!

They lay across the whole Peninsula, and our army was so far from
home that we did not dare to risk a reverse, and we had already
learned at Busaco that it was no child's play to fight against these
people.

What could we do, then, but sit down in front of these lines and
blockade them to the best of our power? There we remained for six
months, amid such anxieties that Massena said afterward that he had
not one hair which was not white upon his body.

For my own part, I did not worry much about our situation, but I looked
after our horses, who were in much need of rest and green fodder.

For the rest, we drank the wine of the country and passed the time as
best we might. There was a lady at Santarem--but my lips are sealed.
It is the part of a gallant man to say nothing, though he may
indicate that he could say a great deal.

One day Massena sent for me, and I found him in his tent with a great
plan pinned upon the table.

He looked at me in silence with that single piercing eye of
his, and I felt by his expression that the matter was serious. He was
nervous and ill at ease, but my bearing seemed to reassure him. It is
good to be in contact with brave men.

"Colonel Etienne Gerard," said he, "I have always heard that you
are a very gallant and enterprising officer."

It was not for me to confirm such a report, and yet it would be folly
to deny it, so I clinked my spurs together and saluted.

"You are also an excellent rider."
I admitted it.

"And the best swordsman in the six brigades of light cavalry."
Massena was famous for the accuracy of his information.

"Now," said he, "if you will look at this plan you will have no
difficulty in understanding what it is that I wish you to do. These
are the lines of Torres Vedras. You will perceive that they cover
a vast space, and you will realise that the English can only hold a
position here and there. Once through the lines you have twenty-five
miles of open country which lie between them and Lisbon. It is very
important to me to learn how Wellington's troops are distributed
throughout that space, and it is my wish that you should
go and ascertain."
His words turned me cold.

"Sir," said I, "it is impossible that a colonel of light cavalry should
condescend to act as a spy."

He laughed and clapped me on the shoulder.

"You would not be a Hussar if you were not a hot-head," said he.

"If you will listen you will understand that I have not asked you to act
as a spy. What do you think of that horse?"
He had conducted me to the opening of his tent, and there was a
chasseur who led up and down a most admirable creature. He was a
dapple grey, not very tall, a little over fifteen hands perhaps, but
with the short head and splendid arch of the neck which comes with
the Arab blood. His shoulders and haunches were so muscular, and yet
his legs so fine, that it thrilled me with joy just to gaze upon him.
A fine horse or a beautiful woman--I cannot look at them unmoved, even
now when seventy winters have chilled my blood. You can think how it
was in the year '10.

"This," said Massena, "is Voltigeur, the swiftest horse in our
army.
What I desire is that you should start tonight, ride round the lines
upon the flank, make your way across the enemy's rear, and return
upon the other flank, bringing me news of his disposition. You will
wear a uniform, and will, therefore, if captured, be safe from
the death of a spy. It is probable that you will get through
the lines unchallenged, for the posts are very scattered.

Once through, in daylight you can outride anything which you meet,
and if you keep off the roads you may escape entirely unnoticed. If
you have not reported yourself by to-morrow night, I will
understand that you are taken, and I will offer them Colonel Petrie in
exchange."
Ah, how my heart swelled with pride and joy as I sprang into the
saddle and galloped this grand horse up and down to show the Marshal
the mastery which I had of him! He was magnificent--we were both
magnificent, for Massena clapped his hands and cried out in his
delight.

It was not I, but he, who said that a gallant beast deserves a gallant
rider. Then, when for the third time, with my panache flying and my
dolman streaming behind me, I thundered past him, I saw upon his
hard old face that he had no longer any doubt that he had chosen
the man for his purpose.

I drew my sabre, raised the hilt to my lips in salute, and galloped
on to my own quarters.

Already the news had spread that I had been chosen for a mission, and
my little rascals came swarming out of their tents to cheer me. Ah!

it brings the tears to my old eyes when I think how proud they were
of their Colonel.

And I was proud of them also. They deserved a dashing leader.

The night promised to be a stormy one, which was very much to my
liking.
It was my desire to keep my departure most secret, for it was evident
that if the English heard that I had been detached from the army
they would naturally conclude that something important was about
to happen.

My horse was taken, therefore, beyond the picket line, as if for watering,
and I followed and mounted him there. I had a map, a compass, and
a paper of instructions from the Marshal, and with these in the
bosom of my tunic and my sabre at my side I set out upon my
adventure.

    A thin rain was falling and there was no moon, so you may
    imagine that it was not very cheerful.

    But my heart was light at the thought of the
    honour which had been done me and the glory which awaited me.

This exploit should be one more in that brilliant series which was
to change my sabre into a baton. Ah, how we dreamed, we foolish
fellows, young, and drunk with success! Could I have foreseen that
night as I rode, the chosen man of sixty thousand, that I should
spend my life planting cabbages on a hundred francs a month! Oh,
my youth, my hopes, my comrades! But the wheel turns and never
stops. Forgive me, my friends, for an old man has his weakness.
My route, then, lay across the face of the high ground of Torres
Vedras, then over a streamlet, past a farmhouse which had been
burned down and was now only a landmark, then through a forest of
young cork oaks, and so to the monastery of San Antonio, which
marked the left of the English position. Here I turned south and
rode quietly over the downs, for it was at this point that Massena
thought that it would be most easy for me to find my way unobserved
through the position. I went very slowly, for it was so dark that
I could not see my hand in front of me. In such cases I leave my
bridle loose and let my horse pick its own way.
Voltigeur went confidently forward, and I was very content to sit
upon his back and to peer about me, avoiding every light.
For three hours we advanced in this cautious way, until it seemed
to me that I must have left all danger behind me. I then pushed on
more briskly, for I wished to be in the rear of the whole army by
daybreak.
There are many vineyards in these parts which in winter become open
plains, and a horseman finds few difficulties in his way.
But Massena had underrated the cunning of these English, for it
appears that there was not one line of defence but three, and it
was the third, which was the most formidable, through which I was
at that instant passing.The song
ceased, and presently from the cottonwood thicket emerged a horse and
rider. The rider wore a roll-brimmed hat and brilliant yellow chaps,
and he was mounted upon a fantastically spotted pinto. "It's--'The
Bishop of All Outdoors'," she smiled, as she returned to the stove.
"He certainly has a voice. I don't blame Mr. Thompson for being crazy
about him. Anybody that can sing like that! And he loves it, too."

A hearty "Good morning" brought her once more to the door.

"Just in time for breakfast," she smiled up into the eyes of the man
on the pinto.

"Breakfast! Bless you, I didn't stop for breakfast. I figured on
breakfasting with my friend, The Villain, over across the ridge."

"The Villain?"

"Vil Holland," laughed the man. "His name, I believe is, Villiers. I
shortened it to Villain, and the natives hereabouts have bobbed it
down to Vil. But he'll have to breakfast alone this morning, as
usual. I've changed my mind. You see, I share the proverbial weakness
of the clergy for a good meal. And against so charming a hostess, old
Vil hasn't a chance in the world." Dismounting, the Reverend Len
Christie removed his saddle and bridle and, with a resounding slap on
the flank turned the pinto loose. "Get along, old Paint, and lay in
some of this good grass!" he laughed as the pinto, cavorting like a
colt, galloped across the creek to join Patty's hobbled cayuse.

"My, that bacon smells good," he said, a moment later, as he stood in
the doorway and watched the girl turn the thin strips in the pan. "Do
let me furnish part of the breakfast," he cried, eagerly and began
swiftly to loosen from behind the cantle of his saddle a slender case,
from which he produced and fitted together a two-ounce rod. "I'll take
it right from your own dooryard in just about two jiffies." He affixed
a reel, threaded a cobweb line, and selected a fly. "Just save that
bacon fry for a few minutes and we'll have some speckled beauties in
the pan before you know it."

Pushing the frying pan to the back of the stove, Patty accompanied him
to the bank of the stream where she watched enthusiastically as, one
after another, he pulled four glistening trout from the water.

"That's enough," he said, as the fourth fish lay squirming upon the
grass. And in what seemed to the girl an incredibly short time, he had
them cleaned, washed, and ready for the pan. While she fried them he
busied himself with his outfit, wiping his rod and carefully returning
it to its case, and spreading his line to dry. And a few moments later
the two sat down to a breakfast of hot biscuits, coffee, bacon, and
trout, crisp and brown, smoking from the pan.

"You must have ridden nearly all night to have reached here so early,"
ventured the girl as she poured a cup of steaming coffee.

"No," laughed Christie, "I spent the night at the Wattses'. I had some
drawing paper and pencils for David Golieth. Do you know, I've a
notion to send that kid to school some place. He's wild about drawing.
Takes me all over the hills for a mile or two around the ranch and
shows me pictures he has drawn with charcoal wherever there is a piece
of flat rock. He's as shy and sensitive as a girl, until he begins to
talk about his drawing, then his big eyes fairly glow with enthusiasm
as he points out the good points of some of his creations, and the
defects of others. All of them, of course, are crude as the pictorial
efforts of the Indians, but it seems to me that here and there I can
see a flash of real genius."

"Wouldn't it be wonderful if he should become a famous artist!"
exclaimed the girl. "And wouldn't you feel proud of having discovered
him? And I guess lots of them do come from just as unpromising
parentage."

"It wouldn't be so remarkable," smiled the man. "Watts, himself is a
genius--for inventing excuses to rest."

"How is the sick man?" asked Patty. "The one you went to see, over on
Big Porcupine, wasn't it?"

"Yes, old man Samuelson. Fine old fellow--Samuelson. I sure hope he'll
pull through. Doc Mallory came while I was there, and he told me he's
got a good fighting chance. And a fighting chance is all that old
fellow asks--even against pneumonia. He's a man!"

"I wonder if there is anything I could do?" asked the girl.

Christie's face brightened. "Why, yes, if you would. It's a long ride
from here--thirty miles or so. There's nothing you could take them,
they're very well fixed--capital Chinese cook and all that. But I've
an idea that just the fact that you called would cheer them immensely.
They lost a daughter years ago who would be about your age, I think.
They've got a son, but he's up in Alaska, or some place where they
can't reach him. Decidedly I think it would do those old people a
world of good. You'll find Mrs. Samuelson different from----"

"Ma Watts?" interrupted Patty.

The man laughed, "Yes, from Ma Watts. Although she's a well meaning
soul. She's going over and 'stay a spell' with the Samuelsons, just as
soon as she can 'fix to go.' Mrs. Samuelson is a really superior old
lady, refined and lovable in every way. You'll like her immensely. I'm
sure. And I know she will enjoy you."

"Thank you," Patty bowed elaborately. "Poor thing, she must be
frightfully lonely."

"Yes. Of course, the neighbors do all they can. But neighbors are few
and far between. Vil Holland has been over a couple of times, and Jack
Pierce stopped work right in the middle of his upland haying to go to
town for some medicine. I tell you, Miss Sinclair, a person soon
learns who's who in the mountains."

Christie pushed back his chair. "I must be going. I hate to hurry off,
but I want to see Vil and caution him to have an eye on the old man's
stock--you see, there are some shady characters in the hills, and old
man Samuelson runs horses as well as cattle. It is very possible they
may decide to get busy while he is laid up.

"By the way, Miss Sinclair, may I ask if you are making satisfactory
headway in your own enterprise?"

Patty shook her head. "No. I'm afraid I'm making no headway at all.
Sometimes, I think--I'm afraid--" she stumbled for words.

"Is there anything in the world I can do to help you?" asked the man,
eagerly. "If there is, just mention it. I knew your father, and
admired him very much. I'm satisfied he made a strike, and I do hope
you can locate it."

The girl shook her head. "No, nothing, thank you," she answered and
then suddenly looked up, "That is--wait, maybe there is something----"

"Name it." Christie waited eagerly for her to speak.

"It just occurred to me--maybe you could help me--find a school."

"A school!"

"Yes, a school to teach. You see, I have used nearly all my money. By
the end of next month it will be gone, and I must get a job." The man
noticed that the girl was doing her best to meet the situation
bravely.

"Indeed I will help you!" he exclaimed. "In fact, I think I can right
now promise that whenever you get ready to accept it, there will be a
position waiting."

"Even if it is only a country school--just so I can make enough money
this winter to come back next summer."

"I couldn't think of letting a country school get you. We need you
right in town. You see, I happen to be president of the school board,
and if I were to let a perfectly good teacher get away, I'd deserve to
lose my job." Stepping to the door, he whistled shrilly, and a moment
later the piebald cayuse trotted to his side. When the horse stood
saddled and bridled, the man turned to Patty: "Oh, about the
Samuelsons--do you know how to get to Big Porcupine?"

Patty shook her head. "No, but I guess I can find it."

"Give me a pencil and a piece of paper, and I'll show you in a
minute." Leaning over the table, the man sketched rapidly upon the
paper. "We'll say this is the Watts ranch, and mark it R. That's our
starting point. Then you follow down the creek to the ford--here, at
F. Then, instead of following the trail, you turn due east, and follow
up a little creek about ten miles. This arrow pointing upward means up
the creek. When you come to a sharp pinnacle that divides your
valley--we'll mark that [^] so--you take the right hand branch, and
follow it to the divide. That leads, let's see, southeast--we'll mark
it S. E. 3 to D; it runs about three miles to the divide which you
cross. Then you follow down another creek four or five miles until it
empties into Big Porcupine, 4 E. to P., and from there it's easy. Just
turn up Porcupine, pass Jack Pierce's ranch, and about five miles
farther on you come to Samuelson's. Do you get it?"

Patty watched every move of the pencil, as she listened to the explanation.
And when, a few moments later, the big "Bishop of All Outdoors" crossed the
ford and rode out of sight up the coulee that led to the trampled notch in
the hills, she threw herself down at the table and with eyes big with
excitement, drew her father's map from its silk envelope and spread it out
beside Christie's roughly sketched one. "What a fool I am not to have
guessed that those letters must stand for the points of the compass!" she
cried. "It ought to be plain as day, now." Carefully, she read the
cabalistic line at the bottom of the map. "SC 1 S 1 1/2 E 1 S [up arrow] to
[union symbol] 2 W to a. to b. Stake L. C. [zigzag symbol] center." Her
brow drew into a puzzled frown "SC," she repeated. "S stands for south, but
what does SC mean? SW or SE would be southwest, or southeast, but SC--?"
She glanced at the other map. "Let's see, Mr. Christie's first letter is
R--that stands for Watts' Ranch. SC must represent daddy's starting point,
of course! But, SC? Let's see, South Corner--south corner of _what?_ I wish
he'd put his letters right on the map like this one, instead of all in a
row at the bottom, then I might figure out what he was driving at. SC, SC,
SC, SC," she repeated over and over again, until the letters became a mere
jumble of meaningless sounds. "S must stand for South," she insisted, "and
C could stand for creek, or cave, only there are no caves around here that
I've seen, or camp--South Camp--that don't do me any good, I don't know
where any of his camps were. And he'd hardly say Creek, that would be too
indefinite. Let's see, C--cottonwood--south cottonwood--short cottonwood,
scarred cottonwood, well if I have to hunt these hills over for a short
cottonwood or a scarred cottonwood, when there are millions of both, I
might better keep on hunting for the crack in the rock wall."

For a long time she sat staring at the paper. "If I could only get the
starting point figured out, the rest would be easy. It says one mile
south, one and one half miles east, one mile south, then the arrowhead
pointing up, must mean up a creek or a mountain to something that
looks like an inverted horseshoe, then, two miles west to a. to b.
whatever a. and b. are. There are no letters on the map, then it says
to stake L. C.--L. C., is lode claim, at least, I know that much, and
it can be 1500 feet long along the vein, and 300 feet each way from
the center. But what does he mean by the wiggly looking mark before
the word center? I guess it isn't going to be quite as easy as it
looks," she concluded, "even when I know that the letters stand for
the points of the compass. If I could only figure out where to start
from I could find my way at least to the a. b. part--and that would be
something.

"Anyway, I know how to make a map, now, and that is just exactly what
I needed to know in order to set my trap for the prowler who is
continually searching this cabin. It's all ready but the map, and I
may as well finish up the job to-day as any time." From the pocket of
her shirt she drew a photograph and examined it critically. "It looks
a good deal like the close-up of one of daddy's," she said
approvingly, "and it certainly looks as if it might have been carried
for a year." Returning the picture to her pocket, she folded the
preacher's map with her father's and replaced them in the envelope,
then making her way to the coulee, extracted from the tin can two or
three of her father's ore samples. These, together with a light
miner's pick, she placed in an empty flour sack which she secured to
her saddle and struck out northwestward into the hills.

At the top of the first divide she stopped, carefully studied the back
trail, and producing paper and pencil made a rough sketch which she
marked 1 NW. She rode on, mapping her trail and adding letters and
figures to denote distance and direction.

Her continued scrutiny of the back trail satisfied her that she was
not followed. Two hours brought her to her journey's end, a rock wall
some seven miles from her cabin. Producing the photograph, she
verified the exact location, and with her pick, proceeded to stir up
the ground and loose rocks at the base of the ledge. For an hour she
worked steadily, then carefully replaced the dirt and small fragments,
taking care to leave the samples from her sack where they would appear
to have been tossed with the other fragments. Indicating the spot by a
dot on the photograph she rode back to her cabin and spent the entire
afternoon covering sheets of paper with trail maps, and letters, and
figures, in an endeavor to produce a sketch that would pass as a
prospector's hastily prepared field map. At last she produced several
that compared favorably with her father's and taking a blank leaf from
an old notebook she found in the pack sack, drew a very creditable
rough sketch.

"Now, for putting in the letters and figures," she said, as she held
the paper up for inspection. "Let's see, where would daddy have
started from? Watts's ranch, maybe, or he could have started from
here. This cabin was here then, and that would make it seem all the
more reasonable that I should have chosen this for my home. C stands
for cabin, or, let's see, what did they call this place. The sheep
camp, here goes SC--Why! SC--SC! That's the starting point on daddy's
map! And here I sat right in this chair and nearly went crazy trying
to figure out what SC meant! And, if it weren't so late, I'd start
right out now to find my mine! If it weren't for that a. b. part I
could ride right to it, and snap my fingers at the prowler. But, it
may take me a long time to blunder onto the meaning of these letters,
and anyway, I want to know 'who's who,' as Mr. Christie says." She
continued her work, and a half-hour later examined the result
critically. "SC 1 NW 1 N [up arrow] to [union symbol] 2 E to a. Stake L. C.
center at dot," she read, "and just to make it easier for him, I put
the a. down on the map." With a sigh of satisfaction the girl
carefully placed the new map and photograph in the silk envelope, and
placing the others in the pocket of her shirt, fastened it with a pin.
Whereupon, she gathered up all the practice sketches and burned them.

Glancing out of the window, she saw Microby Dandeline approaching the
cabin, her dejected old Indian pony, ears a-flop, placing one foot
before the other with the extreme deliberation that characterized his
every movement. Patty smiled as her eyes took in the details of the
grotesque figure; the old harness bridle with patched reins and one
blinder dangling, the faded gingham sunbonnet hanging at the back of
the girl's neck, held in place by the strings knotted tightly beneath
her chin, the misshapen calico dress caught over the saddle-horn in a
manner that exposed the girl's bare legs to the knees, and the thick
bare feet pressed uncomfortably into the chafing rope stirrups--truly,
a grotesque, and yet, Patty frowned--a pitiable figure, too. The pony
halted before the door, and Patty greeted the girl who scrambled
clumsily to the ground.

"Well, well, if it isn't Microby Dandeline! You haven't been to see me
lately. The last time you were here I was not at home."

"Hit wasn't me."

"What!" exclaimed Patty, remembering the barefoot track at the spring.

"I wasn't yere las' time."

Patty curbed a desire to laugh. The girl was deliberately lying--but
why? Was it because she feared displeasure at the invasion of the
cabin. Patty thought not, for such was the established custom of the
country. The girl did not look at her, but stood boring into the dirt
with her bare toe.

"Well, you're here now, anyway," smiled Patty. "Come on in and help me
get supper, and then we'll eat. You get the water, while I build the
fire."

When the girl returned from the spring, Patty tried again: "While I
was in town somebody came here and cooked a meal, and when they got
through they washed all the dishes and put them away so nicely I
thought sure it was you, and I was glad, because I like to have you
come and see me."

"Hit wasn't me," repeated the girl, stubbornly.

"I wonder who it could have been?"

"Mebbe hit was Mr. Christie. He was to our house las' night. He brung
Davy some pencils an' a lot o' papers fer to draw pitchers. Pa 'lowed
how Davy'd git to foolin' away his time on 'em, an' Mr. Christie says
how ef he learnt to drawer good, folks buys 'em, an' then Davy'll git
rich. Pa says, whut's folks gonna pay money fer pitchers they kin git
'em fer nothin'? But ef folks gits pitchers they does git rich, don't
they?"

"Why, yes----"

"You got pitchers, an' yo' rich."

Patty laughed. "I'm afraid I'm not very rich," she said.

"Will yo' give me a pitcher?"

"Why, yes." She glanced at the few prints that adorned the log wall,
trying to make up her mind which she would part with, and deciding
upon a mysterious moonlight-on-the-waves effect, lifted it from the
wall and placed it in the girl's hands.

Microby Dandeline stared at it without enthusiasm: "I want a took
one," she said, at length.

"A what?"

"A one tooken with that," she pointed at the camera that adorned the
top of the little cupboard.

"Oh," smiled Patty, "you want me to take your picture! All right, I'd
love to take your picture. You can get on Gee Dot, and I'll take you
both. But we'll have to wait till there is more light. The sun has
gone down and it's too dark this evening."

The girl shook her head, "Naw, I don't want none like that. That
hain't no good. I want one like yo' pa tookened of his mine. Then I'll
git rich too."

"So that's it," thought Patty, busying herself with the biscuit dough.
And instantly there flashed into her mind the words of Ma Watts, "Mr.
Bethune tellin' her how she'd git rich ef she could fin' a gol' mine,
an' how she could buy her fine clos' like yourn an' go to the city an'
live." And she remembered that the woman had said that all the time
she and Lord Clendenning had been wrangling over the eggs, Bethune and
Microby had "talked an' laughed, friendly as yo' please."

"How do you know my father took any pictures of his mine?" asked
Patty, cautiously.

"'Cause he did."

"What would you do with the picture if I gave it to you?"

"I'd git rich."

"How?"

"'Cause I would."

Patty whirled suddenly upon the girl and grasping her shoulder with a
doughy hand shook her smartly: "Who told you that? What do you mean?
Who are you trying to get that picture for? Come! Out with it!"

"Le' me go," whimpered the girl, frightened by the unexpected attack.

"Not 'til you tell me who told you about that picture. Come
on--speak!" The shaking continued.

"Hit--wu-wu-wus--V-V-Vil Hol-Holland!" she sniffled readily--all too
readily to be convincing, thought Patty, as she released her grip on
the girl's shoulder.

"Oh, it was Vil Holland, was it? And what does he want with it?"

"He--he--s-says h-how h-him an' m-me'd g-git r-r-rich!"

"Who told you to say it was Vil Holland?"

"Hit wus Vil Holland--an' that's whut I gotta say," she repeated,
between sobs. "An' now yo' mad--an'--an' Mr. Bethune he'll--he'll kill
me."

"Mr. Bethune? What has Mr. Bethune got to do with it?"

The girl leaped to her feet and faced Patty in a rage: "An' he'll kill
yo', too--an' I'll be glad! An' he says he's gonna By God git that
pitcher ef he's gotta kill yo', an' Vil Holland, an' everyone in these
damn hills--an' I'm glad of hit! I don't like yo' no more--an' pitcher
shows _hain't_ as good as circusts--an' I don't like towns--an' I
hain't a-gonna wear no shoes an' stockin's--an' I'm a-gonna tell ma
yo' shuck me--an' she'll larrup yo' good--an' pa'll make yo' git out
o' ar sheep camp--an' I'm glad of hit!" She rushed from the cabin, and
mounting her pony, headed him down the creek, turning in the saddle
every few steps to make hateful mouths at the girl who stood watching
from the doorway.


CHAPTER XIV

THE SAMUELSONS


Patty retired that night with her thoughts in a whirl. So, it was Monk
Bethune who, all along, had been plotting to steal the secret of her
father's strike? Monk Bethune, with his suave, oily manner, his
professed regard for her father, and his burning words of love! Fool
that she couldn't have penetrated his thin mask of deceit! It all
seemed so ridiculously plain, now. She remembered the flash of
distrust that her first meeting with him engendered. And, step, by
step, she followed the course of his insidious campaign to instill
himself into her good graces. She thought of the blunt warning of Vil
Holland when he told her that her father always played a lone hand,
and his almost scornful question as to whether her father had told her
of his partnership with Bethune. And she remembered her defiance of
Holland, and her defense of Bethune. And, with a shudder, she
recollected the moments when, in the hopelessness of her repeated
failures, she had trembled upon the point of surrendering to his
persuasive eloquence.

With the villainous scheming of Bethune exposed, her thoughts turned
to the other, to her "guardian devil of the hills." What of Vil
Holland? Had she misjudged this man, even as she had so nearly become
the dupe of Bethune? She realized now, that nearly everyone with whom
she had come into contact, distrusted Bethune, and that they trusted
Vil Holland. She realized that her own distrust of him rested to a
great extent upon the open accusations of Bethune, and the fact that
he was blunt to rudeness in his conversations with her. If he were to
be taken at his neighbors' valuation, why was it that he watched her
comings and goings from his notch in the hills? Why did he follow her
about upon her rides? And why did he carry that disgusting jug? She
admitted that she had never seen him the worse for indulgence in the
contents of the jug, but if he were not a confirmed drunkard, why
should he carry it? She knew Bethune hated him--and that counted a
point in his favor--now. But it did not prove that he was not as bad
as Bethune. But why had Bethune told Microby that he would get that
picture if he had to kill her and Vil Holland? What had Vil Holland
to do with his getting the picture! Surely, Bethune did not believe
that Vil Holland shared her secret! Vil Holland _must_ be lawless--the
running of the sheep herder out of the hills was a lawless act. Why,
then, were such men as Thompson and the Reverend Len Christie his
friends? This question had puzzled her much of late, and not finding
the answer, she realized her own dislike of the man had waned
perceptibly. Instinctively, she knew that Len Christie was genuine.
She liked this "Bishop of All Outdoors," who could find time to ride a
hundred miles to cheer a sick old man; who would think to bring
pencils and drawing paper to a little boy who roamed over the
hillsides with a piece of charcoal, searching for flat rocks upon
which to draw his pictures; and who sang deep, full-throated ballads
as he rode from one to the other of his scattered hill folk, upon his
outlandish pinto. Surely, such men as he, and the jovial,
whole-hearted Thompson--men who had known Vil Holland for
years,--could not be deceived.

"Is it possible I've misjudged him?" she asked herself. And when at
last she dropped to sleep it was to plunge into a confused jumble of
dreams whose dominant figure was her lone horseman of the hills.

Patty resolved to keep her promise to Christie and ride over to the
Samuelson ranch, before she started to work out the directions of her
father's map. "I may be weeks doing it if I continue to be as dumb as
I have been," she laughed. "And when I get started I know I'll never
want to stop 'til I've worked it out."

Immediately after breakfast she saddled her horse and returning to the
cabin, picked up the little oiled silk packet that contained
photograph and map. Where should she hide it? Her glance traveled from
the locked trunks to the loose board in the floor. Each had been
searched time and again. "Whoever he is, he'd think it was funny that
I decided all at once to hide the map, when I've been carrying it with
me so persistently," she muttered. Her eyes rested upon the little
dressing table. "The very thing!" she cried. "I'll leave it right out
in plain sight, and he'll think I forgot it." Her first impulse was to
remove the thin gold chain but she shook her head: "No, it will look
more as if I'd just slipped it off for the night if I leave the chain
on. And besides," she smiled, "he ought to get some gold for his
pains." With a last glance of approval at the little packet lying as
if forgotten upon the dressing table, she closed the door and headed
down the creek.

It was evident to Patty, upon reaching the Watts ranch that Microby
Dandeline had not carried out her threat to "tell ma" about the
shaking. For the mountain woman was loquaciously cordial as usual:
"Decla'r ef hit hain't yo', up an' a-ridin' fo' sun-up! Yo' shore
favor yo' pa. He wus the gittin'est man--Yo'd a-thought he wus ridin'
fer wages, 'stead o' jest prospectin'. Goin' down the crick, to-day,
eh? Well, I don't reckon yo' pa's claim's down the crick, but yo'
cain't never tell. He wus that clost-mouthed--I've heard him an' Watts
set a hour, an' nary word between the two of 'em. 'Pears like they's
jest satisfied to be a-lightin' matches an' a-puffin' they pipes.
Wimmin folks hain't like thet. They jest nachelly got to let out a
word now an' then, 'er bust--one."

"Microby Dandeline!" there was a sudden rush of bare feet upon the
wooden floor, and Patty caught a flick of calico and a flash of bare
legs as the girl disappeared around the corner of the barn.

"Land sakes! Thet gal acts like she's p'ssessed! She tellin' whut a
nice time she had to yo' place las' evenin', an' then a-runnin' away
like she's wild as a hawrk. Seems like she's a-gittin' mo' triflin'
every day----"

"Sence Monk Bethune's tuk to ha'ntin' this yere crick so reg'lar,"
interrupted Watts, who stood leaning against the door jamb.

"'T'aint nothin' agin Mr. Bethune, 'cause he's nice to Microby,"
retorted the woman; "I s'pose 'cordin' to yo' idee, he'd ort to cuss
her an' kick her aroun'."

"Might be better in the long run, an' he did," opined the man,
gloomily.

"Where's yo' manners at? Not sayin' 'howdy'?" reminded his wife.

"I be'n a-fixin' to," he apologized, "yo' lookin' mighty peart this
mawnin'." A cry from the baby brought a torrent of recrimination upon
the apathetic husband: "Watts! Watts! Looks like yo' ort to could look
after Chattenoogy Tennessee, that Microby Dandeline run off an' left
alone. Like's not she's et a nail thet yo' left a han'ful of on the
floor thet day yo' aimed fer to fix me a shelft."

"She never et no nail," confided the man, as he returned a moment
later carrying the infant. "She done fell out the do' an' them hens
wus apeckin' her. She's scairt wuss'n hurt."

"Well," smiled Patty. "I must go. Tell Microby to come up to my cabin
right soon. I'd like to have a talk with her."

"Might an' yo' pa's claim 'ud be som'ers up the no'th branch,"
suggested the woman. "He rid that-a-way sometimes, didn't he, Watts?"

"I'm not prospecting to-day. I'm going over to see the Samuelsons. Mr.
Samuelson is sick."

"Law, yes! I be'n a-aimin' fer to git to go, this long while. I heern
it a spell back, an' Mr. Christie done tol' us over again. They do say
he's bad off. But yo' cain't never tell, they's hopes of 'em gittin'
onto they feet agin right up 'til yo' hear the death rattle. Yo' tell
Miz Samuelson I aim to git over soon's I kin. I'll bring along the
baby an' a batch o' sourdough bread, an' fix to stay a hull week.
Watts'll hev to make out with Microby an' the rest. Yo' tell Miz
Samuelson I say not to git down in the mouth. They all got to die
anyhow. An' 'taint so bad, onct it's over an' done. But lots of 'em
gits well, too. So they hain't no call to do no diggin' right up to
the death rattle--an' even then they don't allus die. Ol' man Rink,
over on Tom's Hope, back in Tennessee, he rattled twict, an' come to
both times, an' then, couple days later, he up an' died on 'em 'thout
nary rattle. So yo' cain't never tell--men's thet ornery, even the
best of 'em."

Christie's prediction that Patty would like Mrs. Samuelson proved to
be conservative in the extreme. From the moment the slight gray-haired
little woman greeted her, the girl felt as though she were talking to
an old friend. There was something pathetic in the old lady's cheerful
optimism, something profoundly pathetic in the endeavor to transform
her bit of wilderness into some semblance to the far-away home she had
known in the long ago. And she had succeeded admirably. To cross the
Samuelson threshold was to step from the atmosphere of the cow-country
and the mountains into a region of comfort and quiet that contrasted
sharply with the rough and ready air of the neighboring ranches. The
house itself was not large, but it was built of lumber, not logs. The
long living room was provided with tastefully curtained casement
windows, and rugs of excellent quality took the place of the
inevitable carpet upon the floor. A baby grand piano projected into
the room from its niche beside the huge log fireplace, and bookcases,
guiltless of glass fronts, occupied convenient spaces along the wall,
their shelves supporting row upon row of good editions. It was in
this room, looking as though she had stepped from an ivory miniature,
that the mistress of the house greeted Patty.

"You are very welcome, my dear. Mr. Samuelson and I were deeply
grieved to hear the sad news of your father. We used to enjoy his
occasional brief visits."

"How is Mr. Samuelson?" asked Patty, as she pressed the little woman's
thin, blue-veined hand.

"He seems better to-day."

The girl noted the hopeful tone of voice. "Is there anything I can
do?" she asked.

"Not a thing, thank you. Mr. Samuelson sleeps a good part of the time,
and Wong Yie is a wonderful nurse. But, come, you must have luncheon.
I know you will want to refresh yourself after your long ride. The
bathroom is at the head of the stairs. I'll take a peep at my invalid
and when you are ready we'll see what Wong Yie has for us."

Patty looked hungrily at the porcelain tub--"A real bathroom!" she
breathed, "out here in the mountains--and books, and a piano!"

Mrs. Samuelson awaited her at the foot of the stair and led the way to
the dining room. When she was seated at the round mahogany table she
smiled across at the old lady in frank appreciation.

"It seems like stepping right into fairyland," she said. "Like the old
stories when the heroes and heroines rubbed magic lamps, or stepped
onto enchanted carpets and were immediately transported from their
miserable hovels to castles of gold inhabited by beautiful princes and
princesses."

The old lady's eyes beamed: "I'm glad you like it!"

"Like it! That doesn't express it at all. Why, if you'd lived in an
abandoned sheep camp for months and prepared your own meals on a
broken stove, and eaten them all alone on a bumpy table covered with a
piece of oilcloth, and taken your bath in an icy cold creek and then
only on the darkest nights for fear someone were watching, and read a
few magazines over and over 'til you knew even the advertisements by
heart--then suddenly found yourself seated in a room like this, with
real china and silver, and comfortable chairs and a _luncheon
cloth_--you'd think it was heaven."

Patty was aware that the old lady was smiling at her across the table.
"If I had lived like that for months, did you say? My dear girl, we
lived for years in that little shack--you can see it from where you
sit--it's the tool house, now. Mr. Samuelson built it with his own
hands when there weren't a half-dozen white men in the hills, and
until it was completed we lived in a tepee!"

"You've lived here a long time."

"Yes, a long, long time. I was the first white woman to come into this
part of the hill country to live. This was the first ranch to be
established in the hills, but we have a good many neighbors now--and
such nice neighbors! One never really appreciates friends and
neighbors until a time--like this. Then one begins to know. A long
time ago, before I knew, I used to hate this place. Sometimes I used
to think I would go crazy, with the loneliness--the vastness of it
all. I used to go home and make long visits every year, and then--the
children came, and it was different." The woman paused and her eyes
strayed to the open window and rested upon the bold headland of a
mighty mountain that showed far down the valley.

"And--you love it, now?" Patty asked, softly, as she poured French
dressing over crisp lettuce leaves.

"Yes--I love it, now. After the children came it was all different. I
never want to leave the valley, now. I never shall leave it. I am an
old woman, and my world has narrowed down to my home, and my
valley--my husband, and my friends and neighbors." She looked up
guiltily, with a tiny little laugh. "Do you know, during those first
years I must have been an awful fool. I used to loathe it all--loathe
the country--the men, who ate in their shirt sleeves and blew into
their saucers, and their women. It was the uprising that brought me to
a realization of the true worth of these people--" The little woman's
voice trailed off into silence, and Patty glanced up from her salad to
see that the old eyes were once more upon the far blue headland, and
the woman's thoughts were evidently very far away. She came back to
the present with an apology: "Why bless you, child, forgive me! My old
wits were back-trailing, as the cowboys would say. You have finished
your salad, come, let's go out onto the porch, where we can get the
afternoon breeze and be comfortable." She led the way through the
living-room where she left the girl for a moment, to tiptoe upstairs
for a peep at the sick man. "He's asleep," she reported, as they
stepped out onto the porch and settled themselves in comfortable
wicker rockers.

"What was the uprising?" asked Patty. "Was it the Indians? I'd love to
hear about it."

"Yes, the Indians. That was before they were on reservations and they
were scattered all through the hills."

A cowboy galloped to the porch, drew up sharply, and removed his hat.
"We rode through them horses that runs over on the east slope an'
they're all right--leastways all the markers is there, an' the bunches
don't look like they'd be'n any cut out of 'em. But, about them white
faces--Lodgepole's most dried up. Looks like we'd ort to throw 'em
over onto Sage Crick."

The little woman looked thoughtful. "Let's see, there are about six
hundred of the white faces, aren't there?"

"Yessum."

"And how long will the water last in Lodgepole?"

"Not more'n a week or ten days, if we don't git no rain."

"How long will it take to throw them onto Sage Creek?"

"Well, they hadn't ort to be crowded none this time o' year. The four
of us had ort to do it in three or four days."

The old lady shook her head. "No, the cattle will have to wait. I
want you boys to stay right around close 'til you hear from Vil
Holland. Keep your best saddle horses up and at least one of you stay
right here at the ranch all the time. The rest of you might ride
fences, and you better take a look at those mares and colts in the big
pasture."

The cowboy's eyes twinkled: "I savvy, all right. Guess I'll take the
bunk-house shift myself this afternoon. Got a couple extry guns to
clean up an' oil a little."

"Whatever you do, you boys be careful," admonished the woman. "And in
case anything happens and Vil Holland isn't here, send one of the boys
after him at once."

The other laughed: "Guess they ain't much danger, if anything happens
he won't be a-ridin' right on the head of it." The cowboy gathered up
his reins, dropped them again, and his gloved fingers fumbled with his
leather hat band. The smile had left his face.

"Anything else, Bill?" asked Mrs. Samuelson, noting his evident
reluctance to depart.

"Well, ma'am, how's the Big Boss gittin' on?"

"He's doing as well as could be expected, the doctor says."

The cowboy cleared his throat nervously: "You know, us boys thinks a
heap of him, an' we'd like fer him to git a square deal."

"A square deal!" exclaimed the woman. "Why, what in the world do you
mean?"

"About that there doc--d'you s'pect he savvys his business?"

"Of course he does! He's considered one of the best doctors in the
State. Why do you ask?"

"Well, it's this way. When he was goin' back to town yesterday I laid
for him. You see, the Old Man--er, I mean--you know, ma'am, the Big
Boss, he's a pretty sick man--an' it looks to us boys like things had
ort to break pretty quick, one way er another. So, I says, 'Doc, how's
he gittin' on?' an' the doc he says, jest like you done, 'good as
could be expected.' When you come right down to cases, that don't tell
you nothin'. So I says, 'that's 'cordin' to who's doin' the expectin'.
What we want to know,' I says, 'is he goin' to git well, er is he
goin' to die?' 'I confidently hope we're going to pull him through,'
he comes back. 'Meanin', he's goin' to git well?' I says. 'Yes,' he
says. 'Fer how much?' I asks him. I didn't have but thirty-five
dollars on me, but I shook that in under his nose. You see, I wanted
to find out if the fellow would back his own self up with his money.
'What do you mean?' he says. 'I mean,' I informs him, 'that money
talks. Here's the Missus payin' you good wages fer to cure up the Old
Man. You goin' to do it, an' earn them wages, or ain't you? Here's
thirty-five dollars that says you can't cure him.'"

The corners of the old lady's mouth were twitching behind the
handkerchief she held to her lips: "What did the doctor say?" she
asked.

"Tried to laugh it off," declared the cowboy in disgust. "But I
reminds him that this here ain't no laughin' matter. 'D'you s'pose,' I
says, 'if the Old Man told me: "Bill, there's a bad colt to bust," or
"Bill, go over onto Monte's Crick, an' bring back them two-year-olds,"
do you s'pose I wouldn't bet I could do it? They's plenty of us here
to do all the "confidently hopin'" that's needed. What you got to do
is to git busy with them pills an' make him well,' I says, 'or quit
an' let someone take holt that kin.'" The man paused and regarded the
woman seriously. "What I'm gittin' at is this: If this here doc ain't
got confidence enough in his own dope to back it with a bet, it's time
we got holt of one that will. Now, ma'am, you better let me send one
of Jack Pierce's kids to town to see Len Christie an' tell him to git
the best doc out here they is. I'll write a note to Len on the side
an' tell him to tell the doc he kin about double his wages, 'cause the
rest of the boys feels just like I do, an' we'll all bet agin him so't
it'll be worth his while to make a good job of it." He paused,
awaiting permission to carry out his plan.

The little woman explained gravely: "Doctors never bet on their cases,
Bill. It isn't that they won't back their judgment. But because it
isn't considered proper. Doctor Mallory is doing all any mortal man
can do. He's a wonderfully good doctor, and it was Len Christie,
himself, that recommended him."

The cowboy's eyes lighted: "It was? Well, then, mebbe he's all right.
I never had no time fer preachers 'til I know'd Len. But, what he says
goes with me--he's square. I don't go much on no doctor, though.
They're all right fer women, mebbe, an' kids. I believe all the Old
Man needs right now to fix him up good as ever is a big stiff jolt of
whisky an' bitters." The cowboy rode away, muttering and shaking his
head, but not until he was well out of sight round the corner of the
house did the little woman with the gray hair smile.

"I hope Doctor Mallory will understand," she said, a trifle
anxiously, "I have some rather trying experiences with my boys, and if
Bill has gone and insulted the doctor I'll have to get Jack Pierce to
go to town and explain."

"This Bill seems to just adore Mr. Samuelson," ventured Patty. "Why
his voice was almost--almost reverent when he said 'the Old Man.'"

The little lady nodded: "Yes, Bill thinks there's no one like him. You
see, Bill shot a man, one day when--he was not quite himself. Over in
the Blackfoot country, it was, and Vil Holland knew the facts in the
case, and he rode over and told Mr. Samuelson all about it, and they
both went and talked it over with the prosecuting attorney, and with
old Judge Nevers, with the result that they agreed to give the boy a
chance. So Mr. Samuelson brought him here. That was five years ago.
Bill is foreman of this outfit now, and our other three riders are
boys that were headed the same way Bill was. Vil Holland brought one
of them over, and Bill and Mr. Samuelson picked up the other two--and,
if I do say it myself," she declared, proudly, "there isn't an outfit
in Montana that can boast a more capable or loyal, or a straighter
quartet of riders than this one."

As Patty listened she understood something of what was behind the
words of Thompson and Len Christie, when they had spoken that day of
"Old Man" Samuelson. But, there was something she did not understand.
And that something was--Vil Holland. Everybody liked him, everybody
spoke well of him, and apparently everybody but herself trusted him
implicitly. And yet, to her own certain knowledge, he did carry a jug,
he did follow her about the hills, and he did tell her to her face
that when she found her father's claim she would have a race on her
hands, and that if she were beaten she would have to be satisfied with
what she would get.

But Vil Holland, his comings and his goings were soon forgotten in the
absorbing interest with which Patty listened as her little gray-haired
hostess recounted incidents and horrors of the Indian uprising, the
first sporadic depredations, the coming of the troops, and finally the
forcing of the belligerent tribes onto their reservations.

It had been Patty's intention to ride back to her cabin in the
evening, but Mrs. Samuelson would not hear of it. And, indeed the girl
did not insist, for despite the fact that she had become thoroughly
accustomed to her surroundings, the anticipation of a dinner prepared
and served by the highly efficient Wong Yie, in the tastefully
appointed dining room, with its real silver and china, proved
sufficiently attractive to overcome even her impatience to begin the
working out of her father's map. And the realization fully justified
the anticipation. When the meal was finished the two women had talked
the long evening away before the cheerful blaze of the wood fire, and
when at last she was shown to her room, the girl retired to luxuriate
in a real bed of linen sheets and a box mattress.


CHAPTER XV

THE HORSE RAID


Patty did not know how long she had slept when she awoke, tense and
listening, sitting bolt upright in bed. Moonlight flooded the room
through the windows thrown wide to admit the chill night air. Beyond
the valley floor, green with the luxuriant second crop of alfalfa, she
could see the mountains looming dim and mysterious in the half-light.

The whole world seemed silent as the grave--and yet, something must
have awakened her. She shuddered, partly at the chill that struck at
her thinly clad shoulders, and partly at the recollection of some of
the scenes those selfsame mountains had witnessed, during the
uprisings, and which her hostess had so vividly recounted. The girl
smiled, and gazing toward the mountains, pictured long lines of naked
horsemen stealing silently into the valley. She started violently.
Through the open window came sounds, the muffled thud of hoofs upon
the soft ground, the low rattle of bit-chains and spur-rowels, and the
creak of saddle leather. There _were_ horsemen in the valley, and the
horsemen were passing almost beneath her windows--and they were moving
stealthily.

For a moment her heart raced madly--the fancy of those conjured
horsemen, and then the mysterious sounds from the night that were not
fancy, combined in just the right proportion to overcome her with a
momentary terror. She realized that the sounds were passing--growing
fainter, and leaping from the bed, rushed to the window and peered
out. Only silence--profound, unbroken silence, and the moonlight. In
vain she strained her ears to catch a repetition of the faint sounds,
and in vain she peered into the dark shadows cast by the bunk house
and the pole horse-corral. Her windows commanded the eastern wall of
the valley, and its upper reaches. Had there actually been horsemen,
or were the sounds part of her vivid vision of the long ago? "No," she
muttered, "those sounds were real," and she leaned far out of the
window in a vain effort to catch a glimpse of the trail that led down
the creek toward Pierce's.

For some time she remained at the window and then, shivering, crept
back to bed, where she lay speculating upon the identity of these
horsemen who passed in the night. She knew that a horse raid had been
expected. Could these raiders have had the audacity to pass through
the very dooryard of the ranch, knowing as they must have known, that
four armed and determined cowboys occupied the bunk house?

And who were these raiders? At Thompson's she had heard Monk Bethune's
name mentioned in connection with possible horse-thieving. Bethune had
spoken of hurried trips, "to the northward." She remembered that upon
the occasion of their first meeting, she had heard him dickering with
Watts for the rent of his horse pasture, and she recollected the
incident of the changed name. Then, again, only a few days before, she
had parted with him when he struck off the trail to the eastward with
the excuse that he was going over onto the east slope on a matter
having to do with some horses. Bill had mentioned, in talking to Mrs.
Samuelson, that he had been riding through the horses on the east
slope. Could it be possible that the suave Bethune was a horse-thief?
On the other hand, Bethune had openly hinted that Vil Holland was a
horse-thief--and yet, these other people all believed that he was
persistently on the trail of the horse-thieves.

For a long time she lay thinking, guessing, trying to recall little
scraps of evidence that would bear upon the case. Again, a slight
sound brought her to a sitting posture. This time it was the opening
of a door across the hall from her room. The sound was followed by the
soft padding of slippered feet in the hall, the low tapping, evidently
at another door, a few low-voiced words, and a return of the padding
steps. A few moments later other steps hurried along the hall past her
door and rapidly descended the stairs. Patty heard the opening of an
outside door, and once more stealing to the window she saw the
Chinaman hurry across the moonlit yard to the bunk house and throw
open the door. He entered to emerge a moment later and rush to the
horse-corral, where he peered between the poles for a moment and then
made his way swiftly back to the house.

Without lighting the lamp Patty dressed hurriedly. Was the Samuelson
ranch a place of mystery? What was the meaning of the light
sounds--the soft tramp of horses, and the padding of feet upon the
stairs? The footsteps paused at the door across the hall. There
followed a whispered colloquy and the steps retreated rapidly to the
lower regions. Patty opened her door to see Mrs. Samuelson, her face
expressing the deepest agitation, and one thin hand catching together
the folds of a lavender kimono.

"What is the matter?" asked the girl. "What has happened?"

The old lady closed the door from beyond which came sounds of heavy
breathing. "I am afraid he is worse," she whispered. "Wong Yie went to
the bunk house to send the boys for the doctor and for Mrs. Pierce,
and he says they are gone! Their horses are not in the corral. I don't
understand it," she cried. "I told them not to go away. They know,
that with my husband sick, we are in momentary danger from the
horse-thieves, and they know that their place is right here."

"You told Bill to stay until he heard from Vil Holland," reminded
Patty. "Maybe they heard from him, and left without disturbing you."

"That's it, of course!" cried the woman. "I ought to have known I
could trust them. But, for a moment it seemed that--" She stopped
abruptly and glanced anxiously into the girl's face, "But what in the
world will we do? Wong Yie can't ride a step, and if he could, I need
him here----"

"I'll ride to Pierce's!" exclaimed Patty. "And get Mr. Pierce to go
for the doctor, and bring Mrs. Pierce back with me. My horse is in the
corral, and I can get down there in no time."

"Oh, can you? Will you? And you are not afraid--alone at night in the
hills? Under any other circumstances I wouldn't think of letting you
do it, child--especially with the horse-thieves about. But, it seems
the only way----"

"Of course it's the only way! And I'm not a bit afraid."

Hurrying to the corral, Patty saddled her horse, and a few moments
later swung into the trail that led down the creek. She glanced at her
watch; it was one o'clock. The moon floated high in the heavens and
the valley was almost as light as day. Urging her horse into a run,
she found a wild exhilaration in riding through the night, splashing
across shallows and shooting across short level stretches to plunge
through the water again.

After what seemed an interminable wait, Pierce himself appeared at the
door in answer to her persistent pounding. Patty thought he eyed her
curiously as he stood aside and motioned her into the kitchen. Very
deliberately he lighted the lamp and listened in silence until she had
finished. Then, coolly, he eyed her from top to toe: "'Pears to me
I've saw you before," he announced. "Over on the trail, a while back.
An' you was a-ridin' with--Monk Bethune."

"Well?" asked the girl, angered by the man's tone.

"Well," mocked Pierce. "So to-night's the night yer figgerin' on
pullin' the raid, is it?"

"I'm figuring on pulling the raid! What do you mean?"

"I mean you, an' Bethune, an' yer gang. You be'n up a-spottin' the
lay, so's to tip 'em off, an' now you come down here an' tell me the
Old Man's worst so's I'll take out to town fer the doc--an' one less
posse-man in the hills. Yer a pretty slick article, Miss, but it
hain't a-goin' to work."

Patty listened, speechless with rage. When the man finished she found
her tongue. "You--you accuse me of being a--a horse-thief?" she
choked.

"Yup," answered the man. "That's it--an' not so fur off, neither.
Don't you s'pose I know that if the Old Man was worst one of his own
boys would of be'n a foggin' it fer town hisself? I'd ort to take an'
lock you up in the root cellar an' turn you over to Vil Holland, but I
guess if we get all the he ones out of yer gang we kin leave you
loose. 'Tain't likely you could run off no horses single-handed."

A woman whose appearance showed an evident hasty toilet had stepped
from an inner room, and stood listening to the man. Patty was about to
appeal to her when, from the outside came a thunder of hoofs, and
suddenly a man burst into the room. Patty recognized him as Bill, of
the Samuelson ranch. "Come on, Jack, quick! Git yer gun, while I slam
the kak on yer cayuse. The raid's on, they've cut out a bunch of them
three an' four-year-olds offen the east slope an' they're a-foggin'
'em off."

"Bill! Oh, Bill!" cried the girl, in desperation. But the man had
plunged toward the corral, followed by Pierce, buckling on his
cartridge belt as he ran. A moment later both men were in the saddle,
and the sound of pounding hoofs grew far away.

In tears, Patty turned to the woman. "Oh, why couldn't he have
believed me?" she cried. "He thinks I'm one of that detestable gang of
thieves! But, you--surely you don't think I'm a horse-thief?" In
broken sentences she related the facts to the woman, and finished by
begging her to go up to the Samuelson ranch. "I'll ride on to town
for the doctor myself!" she exclaimed. "And surely you can do that
much for your neighbor."

"Do that much fer 'em!" the woman exclaimed. "I reckon they ain't
nothin' I wouldn't do fer _them_. Mebbe Jack's right, an' mebbe he's
wrong. I've saw him be both, 'fore now. Anyways, it ain't a-goin' to
do Samuelsons no harm, nor the horse-thieves no good fer me to go up
there. You hit the trail fer town, an' I'll ride up the crick." The
woman cut short the girl's thanks. "You better take straight on down
Porky 'til it crosses the trail," she advised. "It's a little longer
but you won't git lost that way, an' chances is you would if I tried
to tell you the short cut. Thompsons is great friends with
Samuelsons," called the woman, as Patty mounted. "Better change horses
there! Or, mebbe Thompson'll go on to town fer you."

Below the Pierce ranch the trail was not so good but, unheeding, the
girl held her horse to his pace. In her heart now was no wild
exhilaration of moonlight, nor was there any lurking fear of unknown
horsemen, only a mighty rage--a rage engendered by Pierce's
accusation, but which expanded with each leap of her horse until it
included Vil Holland, Bethune, the Samuelson cowboys, and even Len
Christie and the Samuelsons themselves--a senseless, consuming rage
that caused the blood to throb hotly to her temples and found vicious
expression in driving the rowels into her horse's sides until the
animal tore down the rough, half-lit trail at a pace that sent the
loose stones flying from beneath his hoofs in rattling volleys.

Possibly, it was the rattling of loose stones, possibly her anger
dulled her sensibilities to the point where they were incapable of
taking note of her surroundings, but the fact remains that as she
approached the mouth of a wide coulee that gave into the valley from
the eastward, she did not hear the rumble of hundreds of pounding
hoofs that each second grew louder and more ominous, until as she
reached the mouth of the coulee a rider swept into the valley, his
horse straining every muscle to keep ahead of the herd that thundered
in his wake.

Apparently the horseman did not notice her, and the next moment Patty
was engulfed in the herd. The girl lived one wild moment of terror. In
front, behind, upon each side were madly plunging horses, eyes
staring, mouths agape exposing long white teeth that flashed wickedly
in the moonlight, manes tossing wildly, and air whistling through
wide-flaring nostrils. On and on they swept down the valley. The roar
of hoofs rose to a mighty crescendo of thunder, above which, now and
then, the terrified girl caught fierce yells from the flank of the
herd. So close were the terrorized horses running that it was
impossible for the girl to see the ground before her. Sweating,
plunging bodies surged against her legs threatening each moment to
scrape her feet from the stirrups. Gripping the horn with both hands
she rode in a sort of daze.

Glancing over her shoulder, she caught an occasional flash of white as
the men on the flanks waved sheets above their heads, whose flapping,
fluttering folds urged the maddened horses into a perfect frenzy of
action.

In front, and a little to one side of Patty, a horse went down, a big
roan colt, and she got one horrible glimpse of a grotesquely twisted
neck, and a tangle of thrashing hoofs as another horse plunged onto
his fallen comrade. A horrible scream split the air as he, too, went
down, and the sudden side-surge of the herd all but unseated the
clinging girl. In a second it was over and the herd thundered on.
Patty closed her eyes, and with white, tight-pressed lips, wondered
when her horse would go down. She pictured the bloody, battered
_thing_ that had been herself, lying flattened and gruesome, in the
moonlight when the pounding hoofs swept past.

Time and distance ceased to be. Patty was carried helplessly on, a
part of that frenzied flood of flesh, muscles rigid, brain
tense--waiting for the inevitable moment--the horrible moment that was
to mark the climax of this ride of horrors. She wondered if it would
hurt, or would merciful unconsciousness come with the first impact of
the fall.

Suddenly she opened her eyes. She sensed a change in the rumble of
hoofs. Horses surged together and the pace slackened from a wild rush
to a wilder thrashing of uncertainty. In the forefront a thin red
spurt of flame leaped forth and above the pounding hoofs rang the
report of a shot. The leaders seemed to have stopped and the main body
of the herd pressed and struggled against the unyielding front. Other
spurts of flame pierced the night, and shots rang viciously from all
sides. The horses were milling, churning, about in a huge maelstrom,
in which Patty found herself being slowly forced to the outside as the
unencumbered free horses crowded to the center away from the
terrifying stabs of flame and the crack of guns. She could see a
mounted form before her. Evidently it was the man who had ridden in
the forefront of the herd. The rider was very close, now, his horse
keeping pace with her own which had nearly reached the outer rim of
the churning mass of animals. The brim of his hat shadowed his face
but Patty could see that the gauntleted hand held a six-gun. A shift
of position brought the moonlight full upon the man's front--upon a
scarf of robin's-egg blue caught together at the throat with the
polished tip of buffalo horn. No other horsemen were in sight, but an
occasional sharp report sounded from the opposite side of the herd.
"Vil!" she screamed. "Vil Holland!" The form stiffened in the saddle
and the girl caught the flash of his eyes beneath the hat brim. The
next instant the gun had given place to a heavy quirt in his hand, his
tall, rangy horse plunged straight toward her, the wild horses,
crowding frenziedly to escape the blows as the rider lashed furiously
to the right and to the left as he forced his mount to her side.

"Good God! Girl, what are you doing here? I thought you were one of
them--and I nearly--" The man leaned suddenly forward and grasped the
bit-chain of her bridle. As if knowing exactly what was expected of
them, side by side the two horses fought their way free of the herd,
the big buckskin with ears laid back, snapping viciously at the
crowding horses. A six-gun roared twice. Patty felt a sudden brush of
air against her cheek and the next instant the two horses plunged down
the steep side of a narrow ravine. In the bottom the man released her
bridle. "You stay here!" he commanded gruffly.

"But, the Samuelsons! Mr. Samuelson is--" The words were drowned in a
shower of gravel as the rangy buckskin scrambled up the bank and
disappeared over the top. The rapid transition from anger to terror,
and from terror to relief, proved too much for the girl's nerves and
she burst into a violent fit of sobbing. The tears enraged her and she
shouted at the top of her voice. "I won't stay here!" but the words
sounded puny and weak, and she knew that they had not penetrated
beyond the rim of the ravine. "I won't do it! I won't stay here!" she
kept repeating, the sentences broken by the hysterical sobbing.
Nevertheless, stay there she did, until with a mighty rumble of hoofs
and a scattering volley of shots, the horse herd swept northward, and
when finally she succeeded in gaining the upper level, the sounds came
to her ears faint and far away.

Hurriedly she glanced about her. What was that stretching to the
southward, a long ribbon of white in the moonlight? "The trail!" she
cried. "The trail to town--and to Thompson's!" Just beyond the trail,
upon the brown-yellow buffalo grass a dark object lay motionless.
Patty stared at it in horror. It was the body of a man. Her first
impulse was to put spurs to her horse and fly down that long white
ribbon of trail--to place distance between herself and the thing that
lay sprawled upon the grass. Then a thought flashed into her brain.
Suppose it were he? Vil Holland, the man whom everybody trusted--the
man who had calmly braved the shots of the horse-thieves to rescue her
from that churning maelstrom of horror.

Unconsciously, but surely, under the influence of those upon whose
judgment she knew she could rely, her suspicion and distrust of him
had weakened. She had half-realized the fact days ago, when at thought
of him she found herself forced to enumerate his apparent offenses
over and over again to keep the distrust alive. She thought of him now
as he had fought his way to her, lashing the infuriated horses from
his path. He had appeared, somehow--different. She closed her eyes and
clean cut as though chiseled upon her brain was the picture of him as
he forced his way to her side. Like a flash the detail of difference
broke upon her--The jug was missing! And close upon the heels of the
discovery came the memory of the strange thrill that had shot through
her as his leg pressed hers when their horses had been forced together
by the milling herd, and the sense of security and well being that
replaced the terror in her heart from the moment she had called his
name. A sudden indescribable pain gripped her breast, as though icy
fingers reached up and slowly clutched her heart. With staring eyes
and breath coming heavily between parted lips, she rode toward the
thing on the ground. As she drew near, her horse stopped, sniffing
nervously. She attempted to urge him forward, but he quivered, shied
sidewise, and, snorting his fear, circled the sprawling object with
nostrils a-quiver.

Fighting a terrible dread, the girl forced her eyes to focus upon the
gruesome form, and the next instant she uttered a quick little cry of
relief. The man's hat had fallen off and lay at some distance from the
body. She could see a shock of thick black hair, and noticed that he
wore a cheap cotton shirt that had once been white. There were no
chaps. One leg of his blue overalls had rolled up and exposed six
inches of bare skin which gleamed whitely in the moonlight above the
top of his shoe. The sight sickened, disgusted her, and whirling her
horse she dashed southward along the trail forgetting for the moment
the Samuelsons, the doctor, and everything else in a wild desire to
put distance between herself and that awful thing on the ground.

Not until her horse's hoofs rang upon the hard rock of the canyon
floor, did Patty slacken her pace. Thompson's was only a few miles
farther on. It was dark in the high walled canyon and she slowed her
horse to a walk. He stopped to drink in the shallow creek and the girl
glanced over the back trail. Where was he now! Thundering along with
the recaptured horse herd, or following the thieves in a mad flight
through the devious fastnesses of the mountains. Was it possible that
even at this moment he was lying upon the yellow-brown grass, or among
the broken rock fragments of some coulee, twisted, and shapeless, and
still--like that other who lay repulsive and ugly, with his bare leg
shining white in the moonlight? She shuddered. "No, no, no!" she cried
aloud, "they can't kill him. They're cowards--and he is brave!" Her
voice rang hollow and thin in the rocky chasm, and she started at the
sound of it. Her horse moved on, tongueing the bit contentedly. "They
were right, and I was wrong," she muttered. "And--and, I'm _glad_."

The canyon was left behind and before her the trail wound among the
foothills that rolled away to the open bench. She noticed that the
moon had sunk behind the mountains, yet it was not dark. Glancing
toward the east, she realized that it was morning. She urged her horse
into a lope, and reached Thompson's just as the ranchman and his two
hands were starting for the barn.

"Well, dog my cats, if it ain't Miss Sinclair!" exclaimed the man, and
stood silent for a second as if trying to remember something. He
rushed toward her excitedly. "You want that horse?" he cried, and
without waiting for an answer, turned to the astonished ranch hands:
"You, Mike, throw the shell onto Lightnin', an' git him out here, an'
don't lose no time about it, neither!

"Pete, git that rifle an' lay along the trail! An' if anyone comes
a-foggin' along towards town shoot his horse out from in under him!
Never mind chawin'--you git! Shoot his horse, an' I'll pay the bill.
Any skunk that would try fer to beat a lady out of her claim ain't
a-goin' to expect nothin' but what he gits around this outfit. An'
say, Pete--if it should be Monk Bethune--an' you happen to shoot a
leetle high fer to hit the horse--don't worry none--git, now!

"You come right along of me, an' git a snack from Miz T. while Mike's
a-saddlin' up. It's a long drag to town, even on Lightnin', an' you
ain't et yet. If the coffee ain't hot, you can wait a couple o'
minutes--that there Pete--he won't let nothin' git by--he kin cut a
sage hen's head off twenty rod with that rifle!" Patty had made
several unsuccessful attempts to speak--attempts to which Thompson
paid no attention whatever. At last, she managed to make him
understand. "No, no! It isn't the claim, Mr. Thompson--but, let him
saddle the horse just the same. Mr. Samuelson is worse and I'm riding
for the doctor."

"You!" exclaimed the astonished Thompson. "What's the matter with Bill
or some of Samuelson's riders?"

"They're after the horse-thieves. They ran off a lot of Mr.
Samuelson's horses last night, and they're after them. And they caught
them, and had a battle, and I was in it, and there is a dead man lying
back there beside the trail." Patty talked rapidly, and Thompson
stared open-mouthed.

"Run off Samuelson's horses--battle--dead man--you was in it!" he
repeated, in bewilderment. "Who run 'em off? Where's Vil Holland?
Who's dead?"

"I don't know who's dead. A horse-thief, I guess. And Vil Holland's
with them--with the Samuelson cowboys and that horrid Pierce, and
that's why I had to ride for the doctor--because the cowboys were with
Vil Holland, and Pierce thought I was one of the horse-thieves."

"If you know what you're talkin' about it's more'n what I do," sighed
Thompson, resignedly, as the girl concluded the somewhat muddled
explanation. "If the raid's come off, why wasn't I in on it--an' me
keepin' Lightnin' up an' ready fer it's goin' on three months? They's
a thing or two I do know, though. For one, you've rode fer enough." He
called to Pete, who, rifle in hand, was making for the trail. "Hey,
Pete, come back here with that gun, an' quick as Mike gits the hull
cinched onto Lightnin', you fork him an' hightail fer town an' fetch
Doc Mallory out to Samuelson's. Tell him the Old Man's worse. Better
fetch Len Christie along, too. If there's a dead man, even if he's a
horse-thief, it's better he was buried accordin' to the book. Take
Miss Sinclair's horse to the stable an' tell Mike to onsaddle him an'
give him a feed." He turned to Patty: "You come along in an' rest up
'til Miz T. gits breakfast ready. Then when you've et, you kin begin
at the beginnin' an' tell what's be'n a-goin' on in the hills."

A couple of hours later when Patty concluded her detailed narrative,
Thompson leaned back in his chair. "I got a crow to pick with Vil
Holland, all right, fer not lettin' me in on that there raid."

"Maybe he didn't have time," suggested the girl, and suppressed a
desire to smile at the readiness with which she sprang to the defense
of her "guardian devil of the hills."

Protesting that she needed no rest after her night of wild adventure,
Patty refused the pressing invitation of the Thompsons to remain at
the ranch, and mounting her horse, headed for the cabin on Monte's
Creek.

Once through the canyon, she turned abruptly into the hills and as her
horse, unguided, topped low divides, and threaded mile after mile of
narrow valleys, her thoughts wandered from the all-absorbing topic of
her father's location, to the man for whom she had so recently
experienced such a signal revulsion of feeling. "How could I ever have
been deceived by that disgusting Monk Bethune?" she muttered.
"Especially after he warned me against him. It's a wonder I couldn't
have seen him for the sleek oily devil that he is. I must have been
crazy." She shuddered at the recollection of that day in the little
valley when he boldly made love to her. "It's just blind luck
that--that something _awful_ didn't happen. I could see the lurking
devil in his eyes! And I saw it again, when he sneered at Mr.
Christie. And when Pierce showed very plainly what he thought of him,
he cursed everybody in the hills, and then offered his glaringly false
explanation as to why people hate and distrust him." At the top of a
low divide, she turned her horse into a valley that was not, by any
means, the most direct route to the little cabin on Monte's Creek. A
half hour later she came out onto the plateau, upon the edge of which
Vil Holland's little tent nestled against its towering rock fragment.

For just an instant she hesitated, then, blushing, rode boldly across
the open space toward the little patch of white that showed through
the scrub timber. Pulling up before the tent door the girl glanced
about her. Everything was in its place. Her eyes rested approvingly
upon the well-scoured cooking utensils that hung in an orderly row.
Evidently the camp had not been used the night before. She drew off
her glove and, leaning over, felt the blankets that were thrown over
the ridgepole. They were still wet with the heavy dew, and the
dampened ashes showed that no fire had been built that morning. "Oh,
where is he?" whispered the girl, glancing wildly about, "Surely, he
has had time to reach here--if he's--all right." After a few moments
of silence she laughed nervously: "He's all right," she assured
herself with forced cheerfulness. "Of course, he wouldn't return here
right away. He probably had to help drive those horses back, or--or
help bury that man, or something. I wonder what he thinks of me?
Pierce will tell him his suspicions, and then--finding me mixed in
with those horses--he'll think I've 'thrown in' with Bethune, as he
would say. I must see him. I must!"

Deciding to return later in the day, Patty headed her horse for the
divide and soon found herself at the much trampled notch in the hills.
For some moments she sat staring down at the ground. She glanced
toward the cabin that showed so distinctly in the valley below. "He
certainly watches from here," she mused. "And not just occasionally
either." Suddenly, she straightened in her saddle, and her eyes
glowed: "I wonder if--if he has been watching--Monk Bethune? Watching
to see that no harm comes to--me? Oh, if I only knew--if I only knew
the real meaning of this trampled grass!" Resolutely, she gathered up
her reins. "I _will know_!" she muttered. "And I'll know before very
long, too. That is, I _hope_ I will," she qualified, as the bay cayuse
began to pick his way carefully down the steep descent to Monte's
Creek.


CHAPTER XVI

PATTY FINDS A GLOVE


Dismounting before her cabin, Patty dropped her reins, pushed open the
door, and entered. Her eyes flew to the little dressing table. The
packet was gone! With a thrill of exultation she carefully inspected
the room. Everything was exactly as she had left it. No blundering
Microby had been here during her absence, for well she knew that
Microby could no more have invaded the cabin without leaving traces of
her visit than she could have flown to the moon. It was midday. She
had intended to rest when she reached the cabin, but her impatience to
establish once for all the identity of the cunning prowler dispelled
her weariness, and after a hurried luncheon, she was once more in the
saddle. "We've both earned a good rest, old fellow," she confided to
her horse, as he threaded the coulee she had marked 1 NW, "but it's
only six or seven miles, and we simply must know who it is that has
been calling on us so persistently. And when I find daddy's mine and
have just oodles of money, I'm going to make it up to you for working
you so hard. You're going to have a nice, big, light, roomy box stall,
and a great big grassy pasture with a creek running through it, and
you're going to have oats three times a day, and you're never going to
have to work any more, and every day I'll saddle you myself and we'll
take a ride just for fun."

Having disposed of her horse's future in this eminently satisfactory
manner, the girl fell to planning her own. She would build a big house
and live in Middleton, and fairly flaunt her gold in the faces of
those who had scoffed at her father--no, she _hated_ Middleton! She
would go there once in a while, to visit Aunt Rebecca, but mainly to
show the narrow, hide-bound natives what they had missed by not
backing her father with a few of their miserable dollars. She would
live in New York--in Washington--in Los Angeles. No, she would live
right here in the hills--the hills, that daddy had loved, and whose
secret he had wrested from their silent embrace. And when she tired of
the hills she would travel. Not the slightest doubt as to her ability
to locate her father's claim assailed her, now that she had learned
to read his map.

It was wonderfully good to be alive. Her glance traveled from the tiny
creek whose shallow waters purled and burbled about her horse's feet,
to the high-flung peaks of the mountains, their loftier reaches
rearing naked and craggy above the dark green girdle of pines. Slowly
and majestically, hardly more than a speck against the blue, an eagle
soared. It was a good world--courage and perseverance made things work
out right. It was cowardly to despair--to become disheartened. She
would find her father's mine--but, first she would prove that Bethune
was a scoundrel of the deepest dye. And she would prove, she admitted
to herself she wanted to prove, that Vil Holland was all his friends
believed him to be. But, she blushed with shame--what must he think of
her? Of her defense of Bethune, of her deliberate rudeness, and worst
of all, of her night ride with the horse-thieves? He knew she had
suspected him--had even accused him. Would he ever regard her as other
than a silly fool? Vividly she pictured him as he had looked lashing
his way to her through the wildly crowding horse herd, determined,
capable, masterful--and wondered vaguely what her answer would have
been had he made love to her as Bethune had done? She smiled at the
thought of Vil Holland, the unsmiling, the outspoken, the
self-sufficient Vil Holland making love!

Upon the summit of a high ridge she paused and gazed down into the
little valley where she had located the false claim. A few moments
more and she would know to a certainty the identity of the prowler who
had repeatedly searched her cabin. Certain as she was whose stakes she
would find marking the claim, it was with a rapidly beating heart that
she urged her horse into the valley and across the creek toward the
rock wall. Yes, there was a stake! And another! And there was the plot
of ground she had laboriously broken at the foot of the wall. She
swung from the saddle and examined the spot. The rock fragments she
had selected from her father's samples were gone! And now to find the
notice! As she turned to search for the other stakes, her glance
rested upon an object that held her rooted in her tracks. For a moment
her heart stopped beating as she stared at the little patch of gray
buckskin that lay limp and neglected where it had fallen. Slowly she
walked to it, stooped, and recovered it from the ground. It was a
gauntleted riding glove--Vil Holland's. She could not be mistaken,
she had seen that glove upon the hand of its owner too many times,
with its deep buckskin fringe, and the horseshoe embroidered in red
and green silk upon its back.

For a long time she stared at the green and red horseshoe. So it was
Vil Holland, after all, and not Monk Bethune, who had systematically
searched her cabin. Vil Holland, who had watched continually from his
notch in the hills. She had been right in the first place, and the
others had been wrong. Everybody disliked Bethune, and disliking him,
had attributed to him all the crookedness of the hill country, and all
the time, under their very noses, Vil Holland was the real
plotter--and they liked him! She could see it all, now--how, with
Bethune for the scapegoat, he was enabled, unsuspected, to plan and
carry out his various schemes, and with no possible chance of
detection--for he himself was the confidential employee of the
ranchmen--the man whose business it was to put an end to the
lawlessness of the hill country.

Patty was surprised that she was not angry. Indeed, she was not
conscious of any emotion. She realized, as she stood there holding the
gaily embroidered glove in her hand, that the rapture, the gladness
of mere existence had left her, and that where only a few minutes
before, her heart had throbbed with the very joy of living, it now
seemed like a thing of weight, whose heaviness oppressed her. She felt
strangely alone and helpless. She glanced about her. The sun still
shone on the green pines and the sparkling waters of the creek, and
above the high-tossed crags the eagle still circled, but the thrill of
joy in these things was gone. Slowly she turned and, still holding the
glove, mounted, and headed for the cabin on Monte's Creek.

At the door she unsaddled her horse, hobbled him, and turned him
loose. She realized that she was very tired, and threw herself down
upon the bunk. When she awoke the cabin was in darkness. The door
stood wide open as she had left it. For a moment she lay trying to
collect her bewildered senses. Through the open door, dimly
silhouetted against the starry sky, she made out the notch in the
valley rim. Her sense rallied with a rush, and she started nervously
as a pack rat scurried across the floor and paused upon the door sill
to peer inquisitively at her with his beady eyes. Crossing the room,
she closed and barred the door, and lighted the lamp. It was twelve
o'clock. She peered at herself in the glass and with an exclamation of
anger, dampened her wash-cloth and scrubbed furiously at her cheek
where, in deep tracery appeared the perfect shape of a horseshoe.

She was very hungry, and rummaging in the cupboard set out a cold
lunch which she devoured to the last crumb. Then she blew out the lamp
and, removing her riding boots, threw herself down upon the bunk to
think. She was angry now, and the longer she thought the angrier she
got. "I can see it all as plain as day," she muttered. "There isn't
anything he wouldn't do! He _did_ cut that pack sack, and he ran the
sheep man out of the hills because he knew it would be dangerous for
him to have a neighbor that might talk. And the Samuelson horse raid!
Of all the diabolical plotting! With his outlaw friends holding
trusted positions on the ranch, and old Mr. Samuelson sick in bed! Oh,
it was cleverly planned! And that Pierce was right in with them. No
wonder he wanted to lock me in his cellar!

"Who, then, was the man that lay sprawled by the side of the trail?"
The girl shuddered at the memory of the cheap cotton shirt torn open
at the throat, and the moonlight shining whitely upon the bare leg.
"Some loyal rancher, probably, who dared to oppose the outlaws. It's
murder!" she cried aloud. "And yesterday I thought he was watching up
there in the hills to see that no harm came to me!" She laughed--a
hard, bitter laugh that held as much of mirth as the gurgle of a tide
rip. "But he's come to the end of his rope! I'll expose him! I'm not
afraid of his lawless crew! He'll find out it will take more than
rescuing me from that herd of wild horses to buy my silence! I'll ride
straight to Samuelson's ranch in the morning, and from there to
Thompson's, and I'll tell them about his part in the raid, and about
his watching like a vulture from his notch in the hills, and about his
stealing what he thought was daddy's map, and about his filing the
claim. And did show 'em the glove and--" She paused abruptly: "What a
fool I was to come away without the notice! That would have proved it
beyond any doubt, even if he hasn't recorded the claim!" For a long
time she lay in the darkness planning her course for the day. All
thought of sleep had vanished, and her eyes continually sought the
window for signs of approaching light.

At the first faint glow of dawn the girl caught up her horse and
headed for the false claim. It was but the work of a moment to locate
the stake to which the notice was attached by means of a bit of twine.
Removing the paper, she thrust it into her pocket and returned to the
cabin where she ate breakfast before starting for the Samuelson ranch.
Hurriedly washing the dishes, she picked up the glove and thrust it
into the bosom of her shirt, and drawing the crumpled notice from her
pocket, smoothed it out upon the table. Her glance traveled rapidly
over the penciled words to the signature, and she stared like one in a
dream. The blood left her face. She closed her eyes and passed her
hand slowly over the lids. She opened them, and with a nerveless
finger, touched the paper as if to make sure that it was real. Then,
very slowly, she rose from her chair and crossing the room, stood in
the doorway and gazed toward the notch in the hills until hot tears
welled into her eyes and blurred the distant skyline. The next moment
she was upon her bunk, where she lay shaken between fits of sobbing
and hysterical laughter. She drew the glove, with its fringed gauntlet
and its gaudily embroidered horseshoe from her shirt front and ran her
fingers along its velvety softness. Impulsively, passionately, she
pressed the horseshoe to her lips, and leaping to her feet, thrust the
glove inside her shirt and stepping lightly to the table reread the
penciled lines upon the crumpled paper, and over and over again she
read the signature; RAOUL BETHUNE, known also as MONK BETHUNE.

The atmosphere of the little cabin seemed stifling. Crumpling the
paper into her pocket, she stepped out the door. She must do
something--go some place--talk to someone! Her horse stood saddled
where she had left him, and catching up the reins she mounted and
headed him at a gallop for the ravine that led to the trampled notch
in the hills. During the long upward climb the girl managed to collect
her scattered wits. Where should she go? She breathed deeply of the
pine-laden air. It was still early morning. A pair of magpies flitted
in short flights from tree to tree along the trail, scolding
incessantly as they waited to be frightened on to the next tree.
Patches of sunlight flashed vivid contrasts in their black and white
plumage, and set off in a splendor of changing color the green and
purple and bronze of their iridescent feathering. A deer bounded away
in a blur of tan and white, and a little farther on, a porcupine
lumbered lazily into the scrub. It was good to be alive! What
difference did it make which direction she chose? All she wanted this
morning was to ride, and ride, and ride! She had her father's map with
her but was in no mood to study out its intricacies, nor to ride
slowly up and down little valleys, scrutinizing rock ledges. She would
visit the Samuelson ranch, and find out about the horse raid, and
inquire after Mr. Samuelson, and then--well, there would be plenty of
time to decide what to do then. But first, she would swing around by
the little tent beside the creek and see if Vil Holland had returned.
Surely, he must have returned by this time, and she must tell him how
it was she had been riding with the horses--and, she must give him
back his glove. She blushed as she felt the pressure of its soft bulk
where it rested just below her heart. Surely, he would need his
glove--and maybe, if she were nice to him, he would tell her how it
came to be there--and maybe he would explain--_this_. Her horse had
stopped voluntarily after his steep climb, and she glanced down at the
trampled grass, and from that to her own little cabin far below on
Monte's Creek.

She wondered, as she rode through the timber how it was she had been
so quick to doubt this grave, unsmiling hillman upon such a mere
triviality as the finding of a glove. And then she wondered at her
changed attitude toward him. She had feared him at first, then
despised him. And now--she recalled with a thrill, the lean ruggedness
of him, the unwavering eyes and the unsmiling lips--now, at least, she
respected him, and she no longer wondered why the people of the hills
and the people of the town held him in regard. She knew that he had
never sought to curry her favor--had never deviated a hair's breadth
from the even tenor of his way in order to win her regard and, in
their chance conversations, he had been blunt even to rudeness. And,
yet, against her will, her opinion of him had changed. And this change
had nothing whatever to do with her timely rescue from the horse
herd--it had been gradual, so gradual that it had been an accomplished
fact even before she suspected that any change was taking place.

The huge rock behind which nestled the little tent loomed before her,
and hastily removing the glove from its hiding place, she came
suddenly upon his camp. A blackened coffee pot was nestled close
against a tiny fire upon which a pair of trout and some strips of
bacon sizzled in a frying pan. She glanced toward the creek, at the
same moment that Vil Holland turned at the sound of her horse's
footsteps, and for several seconds they faced each other in silence.
The man was the first to speak:

"Good mornin'. If you'll step back around that rock for a minute, I'll
slip into my shirt."

And suddenly Patty realized that he was stripped to the waist, but her
eyes never left the point high on his upper arm, almost against the
shoulder, where a blood-stained bandage dangled untidily.

"You're hurt!" she cried, swinging from the saddle and running toward
him.

"Nothin' but a scratch. I got nicked a little, night before last, an'
I just now got time to do it up again. It don't amount to
anything--don't even hurt, to speak of. I can let that go, if you'll
just----"

"Well, I won't just go away--or just anything else, except just attend
to that wound--so there!" She was at his side, examining the clumsy
bandage. "Sit right down beside the creek, and I'll look at it. The
first thing is to find out how badly you're hurt."

"It ain't bad. Looks a lot worse than it is. It was an unhandy place
to tie up, left-handed."

Scooping up water in her hand Patty applied it to the bandage, and
after repeating the process several times, began very gently to
remove the cloth. "Why it's clear through!" she cried, as the bandage
came away and exposed the wound.

"Just through the meat--it missed the bone. That cold water feels
good. It was gettin' kind of stiff."

"What did you put on it?"

"Nothin'. Didn't have anything along, an' wouldn't have had time to
fool with it if I'd been packin' a whole drug-store."

"Where's your whisky?"

"I ain't got any."

"Where's your jug? Surely there must be some in it--enough to wash out
this wound."

The man shook his head. "No, the jug's plumb empty an' dry. I ain't
be'n to town for 'most a week."

Patty was fumbling at her saddle for the little "first aid" kit that
she faithfully carried, and until this moment, had never found use
for. "Probably the only time in the world it would ever do you any
good, you haven't got it!" she exclaimed, disgustedly, as she unrolled
a strip of gauze from about a tiny box of salve.

"I'm sorry there ain't any whisky in the jug. I never thought of
keepin' it for accident."

The girl smeared the wound full of salve and adjusted the bandage,
"Now," she said, authoritatively, "you're going to eat your breakfast
and then we're going to ride straight to Samuelson's ranch. The doctor
will be there and he can dress this wound right."

"It's all right, just the way it is," said Holland. "I've seen fellows
done up in bandages, one way an' another, but not any that was better
'tended to than that." He glanced approvingly at the neatly bandaged
arm. "Anyhow, this is nothin' but a scratch an' it'll be all healed
up, chances are, before we could get to Samuelson's."

"No, it won't be all healed up before you get to Samuelson's either!
Run along, now, and I'll stay here while you finish dressing, and when
you're through, you call me. I've had breakfast but I can drink a cup
of coffee, if you'll ask me."

"You're asked," the man replied, gravely, "and while I go to the tent,
you might take that outfit an' jerk a couple more trout out of the
creek." He pointed to a light fishing pole with hook and line attached
that leaned against a tree. "It ain't as fancy as the outfit Len
Christie packs, but it works just as good, an' ain't any bother to
take care of."

A few minutes later Vil Holland emerged from the tent. "Sorry I ain't
got a table," he apologized, "but a fryin' pan outfit's always suited
me best--makes a fellow feel kind of free to pull stakes an' drift
when the notion hits him."

"But, you've camped here for a long time."

The man glanced about him: "Yes, a long time. I guess I know every
place in the hills for a hundred miles round an' this is the pick of
'em all, accordin' to my notions. Plenty of natural pasture, plenty of
timber, an' this little creek's the coldest, an' it always seems to
me, its water is the sparklin'est of 'em all. An' then, away off there
towards the big mountains, early in the mornin' an' late in the
evenin', when it's all kind of dim down here, you can see the sunlight
on the snow--purple, an' pink, an' sometimes it shines like silver an'
gold. It lays fine for a ranch. Sometime, maybe, I'm goin' to
homestead it. I'll build the cabin right there, close by the big rock,
an' I'll build a porch on it so in the evenin's we could watch the
lights way up there on the snow."

Patty smiled: "Who is 'we'?" she asked, mischievously.

The man regarded her gravely: "Things like that works themselves out.
If there ain't any 'we', there won't be any cabin--so there's nothin'
to worry about."

"Did you catch the horse-thieves?"

Vil Holland's face clouded. "Part of 'em. Not the main ones, though."

Patty shuddered. "I saw one of them lying back there by the trail. It
was horrible."

"Yes, an' a couple of more went the same way, further on. We'd rather
have got 'em alive, but they'd had their orders, an' they took their
medicine. We got the horses, though."

"I suppose you're wondering how I came to be in among those horses?"

"I figured you'd got mixed up in it at Samuelson's, somehow. The boys
didn't know nothin' about it--except Pierce--an' he guessed wrong."

Patty laughed. "He accused me of being one of the gang, and even
threatened to lock me in his cellar."

"He won't again," announced the man, dryly.

"I rode down there to get him to go for the doctor. Mr. Samuelson was
worse, and there was no one else to go. And when I started on for
town, the horses swept down on me and carried me along with them."

"Was the doctor got?" asked Holland with sudden interest.

"Yes, I rode on down to Thompson's, and Mr. Thompson sent a man to
town. He was provoked with you for not letting him in on the raid."

"He'll get over it. You see, I didn't want to call out the married
men. I surmised there'd be gun-play an' there wasn't any use takin'
chances with men that was needed, when there's plenty of us around the
hills that it don't make any difference to anyone if we come back or
not. I didn't figure on lettin' Pierce in."

When they had finished washing the dishes the girl glanced toward the
buckskin that was snipping grass in the clearing: "It's time we were
going. The doctor may start for town this morning and we'll meet him
on the trail."

"This ain't a doctor's job," protested the man. "My arm feels fine."

"It's so stiff you can hardly use it. It must feel fine. But it
doesn't make a particle of difference how fine it feels. It needs
attention. And, surely you won't refuse to do this for me, after I
bandaged it all up? Because, if anything should go wrong it would be
my fault."

Without a word the man picked up his bridle and walking to the
buckskin, slipped it over his head and led him in. He saddled the
horse with one hand, and as he turned toward the girl she held out the
glove.

"Isn't this yours? I found it last evening--out in the hills."

Holland thrust his hand into it: "Yes, it's mine. I'm sure obliged to
you. I lost it a couple of days ago. I hate to break in new gloves.
These have got a feel to 'em."

"Do you know where I found it?"

"No. Couldn't guess within twenty miles or so."

Patty looked him squarely in the eyes: "I found it over where Monk
Bethune has just staked a claim. And he staked that particular claim
because it was the spot I had indicated on a map that I prepared
especially for the benefit of the man who has been searching my cabin
all summer."

Holland nodded gravely, without showing the slightest trace of
surprise. "Oh, that's where I dropped it, eh? I figured Monk thought
he'd found somethin', the way he come out of your cabin the last time
he searched it, so I followed him to the place you'd salted for him."
He paused, and for the first time since she had known him, Patty
thought she detected a flicker of amusement in his eyes. "He didn't
waste much time there--just clawed around a few minutes where you'd
pecked up the dirt, an' then sunk his stakes, an' wrote out his
notice, an' high-tailed for the register's office. JEFFRY MAULBOY was
looked up to and courted, for he had a medal bestowed upon him as
a Champion Paddler, and had lost a bet of fifty dollars on the "Great
International Contest."
But his towering ambition remained unsated. He realized that he lived
in a progressive age, and his superior talents enabled him to take
a stand far ahead of his fellows.

By diligent application to his noble profession, he was now a member
of that exalted Institution, "The Prize Ring of America," and the
letters P.R.U.S.A. were elegantly imprinted with blue ink upon his
right arm.

There were two persons present, however, who didn't regard JEFFRY
MAULBOY as a little god. One was the Hon. MICHAEL LADLE; the other
was ANN BRUMMET.

She was putting her tongue out, and making faces at him from behind
an apple-tree.

A lady who saw her said it improved her appearance.

When BELINDA chose JEFFRY, he very deliberately took a chew of tobacco,
and said he wouldn't play.

"This is the sickest croquet party I ever saw," said BELINDA.

"All backing out. Spos'en I take you then, you dear old buffer,"
she added, addressing the Hon.

MICHAEL.

"I may be an old buffer," said the Hon. Member from the West, but I am
young enough for anything here. As STOWE BYRON says:

"Oh, days of my childhood's hours, I'm a gazin' on ye yit."

He was interrupted by JEFFRY MAULBOY.

"You say you are young enough for anything here," said he; "suppose you
and I try a little mill out back of the house."
"Young man," replied the Hon.

MICHAEL, "if there's one mistake in life that your parents grieve
over, it is probably the mistake of your birth.

If you don't have any serious drawbacks, and are careful of your
health, you will make a first-class DEAD BEAT. When a man insults
me, sir, I lay him out, without depending in the smallest degree upon
an undertaker, but as for standing up in front of a man who mashes
noses by contract, and chaws off ears as a matter of genteel
business, why it ain't my cut."

JEFFRY MAULBOY took another chew of tobacco.

"You can go on," he said. "I won't hurt you. You're too small
potatoes for me."
While this gentle raillery was in progress, BELINDA felt somebody
tugging at her dress. She looked down, and saw Mr. ARCHIBALD BLINKSOP,
a sailor-looking chap who smelt of tar, and well he might, for he
had ploughed the tempestuous deep for upwards of six months, as a
common sailor on the Erie Canal.
"Shiver my starboard binnacle amidships," said he, "why don't you
choose _me?"I believe Bethune planned that raid. And seeing us
together that day, Pierce jumped to the conclusion that I was in with
him."

"Yes, it was Monk's raid, all right, an' him an' Clendenning got away.
He doped it all out that day. I followed him when he quit you there on
the trail, an' watched him plan out the route they'd take with the
horses. Then I done some plannin' of my own. That's why we was able to
head 'em off so handy. We didn't get Bethune an' Clendenning but I'll
get 'em yet."

They had mounted and were riding toward Samuelson's. "Maybe he's made
his escape across the line," ventured the girl, after a long silence.

Holland shook his head: "No, he ain't across the line. He don't think
we savvy he was in on the raid, an' he'll stick around the hills an'
prob'ly put a crew to work on his claim." He relapsed into silence,
and as they rode side by side, under the cover of her hat brim, Patty
found opportunity to study the lean brown face.

"Where's your gun?" The man asked the question abruptly, without
removing his eyes from the fore-trail.

"I left it home. I only carried it once or twice. It's heavy, and
anyway it was silly to carry it, I don't even know how to fire it, let
alone hit anything."

"If it's too heavy on your belt you can carry it on your saddle horn.
I'll show you how to use it--an' how to shoot where you hold it, too.
Mrs. Samuelson ain't as husky as you are, an' she can wipe a gnat's
eye with a six-gun, either handed. Practice is all it takes, an'----"

"But, why should I carry it? Bethune would hardly dare harm me, and
anyway, now that he thinks he has stolen my secret, he wouldn't have
any object in doing so."

"You're goin' to keep on huntin' your dad's claim, ain't you?"

"Of course I am! And I'll find it, too."

"An', in the meantime, what if Bethune finds out he's been tricked?
These French breeds go crazy when they're mad--an' he'll either lay
for you just to get even, or he'll see that he gets the right dope
next time--an' maybe you know what that means, an' maybe you
don't--but I do."

The girl nodded, and as the horses scrambled up the steep slope of a
low divide, her eyes sought the hundred and one hiding places among
the loose rocks and scrub that might easily conceal a lurking enemy,
and she shuddered. As they topped the divide, both reined in and sat
gazing silently down the little valley before them. It was the place
of their first meeting, when the girl, tired, and lost and
discouraged, had dismounted upon that very spot and watched the
unknown horseman with his six-shooter, and his brown leather jug
slowly ascend the slope. She glanced at him now, as he sat, rugged and
lean, with his eyes on the little valley. He was just the same, grave
and unsmiling, as upon the occasion of their first meeting. She
noticed that he held his Stetson in his hand, and that the wind
rippled his hair. "Just the same," she thought--and yet--. She was
aware that her heart was pounding strangely, and that instead of a
fear of this man, she was conscious of a wild desire to throw herself
into his arms and cry with her face against the bandage that bulged
the shirt sleeve just below the shoulder.

"I call this Lost Creek," said Holland, without turning his head. "I
come here often--" and added, confusedly, "It's a short cut from my
camp to the trail."

Patty felt an overpowering desire to laugh. She tried to think of
something to say: "I--I thought you were a desperado," she murmured,
and giggled nervously.

"An' I thought you was a schoolma'am. I guess I was the first to
change my mind, at that."

Patty felt herself blushing furiously for no reason at all: "But--I
have changed my mind--or I wouldn't be here, now."

Vil Holland nodded: "I expect I'll ride to town from Samuelson's. My
jug's empty, an' I guess I might's well file that homestead 'fore
someone else beats me to it. I've got a hunch maybe I'll be rollin' up
that cabin--before snow flies."


CHAPTER XVII

UNMASKED


At the Samuelson's ranch they found not only the doctor but Len
Christie. Mr. Samuelson's condition had taken a sudden turn for the
better and it was a jubilant little group that welcomed Patty as she
rode up to the veranda. Vil Holland had muttered an excuse and gone
directly to the bunk house where the doctor sought him out a few
minutes later and attended to his wound. From the top of "Lost Creek"
divide, the ride had been made almost in silence. The cowboy's
reference to his jug had angered the girl into a moody reserve which
he made no effort to dispel.

The news of Patty's rescue from the horse herd had preceded her,
having been recounted by the Samuelson riders upon their return to the
ranch, and Mrs. Samuelson blamed herself unmercifully for having
allowed the girl to venture down the valley alone. Which
self-accusation was promptly silenced by Patty, who gently forced the
old lady into an arm chair, and called her Mother Samuelson, and
seated herself upon the step at her feet, and assured her that she
wouldn't have missed the adventure for the world.

"We'll have a jolly little dinner party this evening," beamed Mrs.
Samuelson, an hour later when the girl had finished recounting her
part in the night's adventure, "there'll be you and Mr. Christie, and
Doctor Mallory, and the boys from the bunk house, and Vil Holland, and
it will be in honor of Mr. Samuelson's turn for the better, and your
escape, and the successful routing of the horse-thieves."

"Too late to count Vil Holland in," smiled the doctor, who had
returned to the veranda in time to hear the arrangement, "said he had
important business in town, and pulled out as soon as I'd got his arm
rigged up." And, in the doorway, the Reverend Len Christie smiled
behind a screen of cigarette smoke as he noted the toss of the head,
and the decided tightening of the lips with which Patty greeted the
announcement.

"But, he's wounded!" protested Mrs. Samuelson. "In his condition,
ought he attempt a ride like that?"

The doctor laughed: "You can't hurt these clean-blooded young bucks
with a flesh wound. As far as fitness is concerned, he can ride to
Jericho if he wants to. Too bad he won't quit prospecting and settle
down. He'd make some girl a mighty fine husband."

Christie laughed. "I don't think Vil is the marrying kind. In the
first place he's been bitten too deep with the prospecting bug. And,
again, women don't appeal to him. He's wedded to his prospecting. He
only stops when driven to it by necessity, then he only works long
enough to save up a grub-stake and he's off for the hills again. I
can't imagine that high priest of the pack horse and the frying pan
living in a house!"

And so the talk went, everyone participating except Patty, who sat and
listened with an elaborate indifference that caused the Reverend Len
to smile again to himself behind the gray cloud of his cigarette
smoke.

"You haven't forgotten about my school?" asked Patty next morning, as
Christie and the doctor were preparing to leave for town.

"Indeed, I haven't!" laughed the Bishop of All Outdoors. "School opens
the first of September, and that's not very far away. But badly as we
need you, somehow I feel that we are not going to get you."

"Why?" asked the girl in surprise.

"A whole lot may happen in ten days--and I've got a hunch that before
that time you will have made your strike."

"I hope so!" she exclaimed fervidly. "I know I shall just hate to
teach school--and I'd never do it, either, if I didn't need a
grub-stake."

As she watched him ride away, Patty was joined by Mrs. Samuelson who
stepped from the house and thrust her arm through hers. "My husband
wants to meet you, my dear. He's so very much better this
morning--quite himself. And I must warn you that that means he's rough
as an old bear, apparently, although in reality he's got the tenderest
heart in the world. He always puts his worst foot foremost with
strangers--he may even swear."

Patty laughed: "I'm not afraid. You seem to have survived a good many
years of him. He really can't be so terrible!"

"Oh, he's not terrible at all. Only, I know how much depends upon
first impressions--and I do want you to like us."

Patty drew the old lady's arm about her waist and together they
ascended the stairs: "I love you already, and although I have never
met him I am going to love Mr. Samuelson, too--you see, I have heard a
good deal about him here in the hills."

Entering the room, they advanced to the bed where a big-framed man
with a white mustache and a stubble of gray beard lay propped up on
pillows. Sickness had not paled the rich mahogany of the
weather-seamed face, and the eyes that met Patty's from beneath their
bushy brows were bright as a boy's. "Good morning! Good morning! So,
you're Rod Sinclair's daughter, are you? An' a chip of the old block,
by what mama's been tellin' me. I knew Rod well. He was a real
prospector. Knew his business, an' went at it business fashion. Wasn't
like most of 'em--makin' their rock-peckin' an excuse to get out of
workin'. They tell me you ain't afraid to live alone in the hills, an'
ain't afraid to make a midnight ride to fetch the doc for an old
long-horn like me. That's stuff! Didn't know they bred it east of the
Mizoo. The ones mama an' I've seen around the theaters an' restaurants
on our trips East would turn a man's stomach. Why, damn it, young
woman, if I ever caught a daughter of mine painted up like a Piute
an' stripped to the waist smokin' cigarettes an' drinkin' cocktails in
a public restaurant, I'd peel the rest of her duds off an' turn her
over my knee an' take a quirt to her, if she was forty!"

"Why, _papa_!"

"I would too--an' so would you!" Patty saw the old eyes twinkling with
mischief, and she laughed merrily:

"And so would I," she agreed. Johnny's very queer just now; he's in the
"lose the world to save your soul" mood.

It really is too bad of that girl.
After all, we did what most people wouldn't.

MR MARCH. Come! Get your hat on, Mary, or we shan't make the Tube
before the next shower."Miss Sinclair
sounds so--so formal----"

"Me, too!" exclaimed the invalid. "I'll go you one better, an' call
you Pat----"

"If you do, I'll call you Pap--" laughed the girl.

"That's a trade! An' say, they tell me you live over in Watts's sheep
camp. If you should happen to run across that reprobate of a Vil
Holland, you tell him to come over here. "My Braves!" he exclaimed.

"In the name of the Fatherland I thank you."

Another warrior stepped out and saluted.

"And what, my friend," asked the monarch, "did you do?"
"Nothing, Sire," he replied with the unaffected simplicity of the man
of action; "I merely stamped on some little children--twins, I think."

"Two medals for that," said the Emperor with ready wit, and there
was not a wet eye as he placed them in their proud position.
The Vizier beckoned to a youthful officer on whose lip the down was
hardly yet visible.He's the only cowman in the hills I'd trust them white faces
with, an' he's got to winter 'em for me. He's a natural born cowman
an' there's big money in it after he gets a start. I'll give him his
start. It's time he woke up, an' left off his damned rock-peckin', an'
settled down. If he keeps on long enough he'll have these hills
whittled down as flat as North Dakota, an' the wind'll blow us all
over into the sheep country. Now, Pat, can you remember all that?"

The girl turned in the doorway, and smiled into the bright old eyes:
"Oh, yes, Pap, I'll tell him if I see him. Good-by!"

"Good-by, an' good luck to you! Come to see us often. We old folks get
pretty lonesome sometimes--especially mama. You see, I've got all the
best of it--I've got her, an' she's only got me!"

As Patty threaded the hills toward her cabin her thoughts followed the
events of the past few days; the visit of Len Christie in the early
morning, when he had inadvertently showed her how to read her father's
map, the staking of the false claim, the visit to the Samuelson ranch,
the horse raid, the finding of Vil Holland's glove and the bitter
disappointment that followed, then the finding of the notice that
disclosed the identity of the real thief, and her genuine joy in the
discovery, her visit to Holland's camp, and their long ride together.
"I tried to show him that all my distrust of him was gone, but he
hardly seemed to notice--unless--I wonder what he _did_ mean about
having a hunch that he would build that cabin before snow flies?"

For some time she rode in silence, then she burst out vehemently: "I
don't care! I could love him--so there! I could just adore him! And I
don't wonder everybody likes him. He seems always so--so capable--so
confident. You just can't help liking him. If it weren't for that old
jug! He had to drag that in, even up there when he stood on the spot
where we first met--and then at the Samuelsons' he wouldn't even wait
for dinner he was so crazy to get his old whisky jug filled. It never
seems to hurt him any," she continued. "But nobody can drink as much
as he does and not be hurt by it. I just know he meant that the cabin
was going to be for me--or, did he know that Mr. Samuelson was going
to ask him to winter the cattle? He's a regular cave man--I don't know
whether I've been proposed to, or not!"

She crossed the trail for town and struck into a valley that should
bring her out somewhere along the Watts fences. So engrossed was she
in her thoughts that she failed to notice the horseman who slipped
noiselessly into the scrub a quarter of a mile ahead. Slowly she rode
up the valley: "If he comes to teach me how to shoot, I'll tell him
that Mr. Samuelson wants to see him, and if he says any more about the
cabin, or--or anything--I'll tell him he can choose between me and his
jug. And, if he chooses the jug, and I don't find daddy's mine--it
isn't long 'til school opens. I don't mind--he has to work to get his
grub-stake, and so will I."

Her horse snorted and shied violently, and when Patty recovered her
seat it was to find her way blocked by a horseman who stood not ten
feet in front of her and leered into her eyes. The horseman was Monk
Bethune--a malignant, terrifying Bethune, as he sat regarding her with
his sneering smile. The girl's first impulse was to turn and fly, but
as if divining her thoughts, the man pushed nearer, and she saw that
his eyes gleamed horribly between lids drawn to slits. Had he
discovered that she had tricked him with a false claim? If not why the
glare of hate and the sneering smile that told plainer than words that
he had her completely in his power, and knew it.

"So, my fine lady--we meet again! We have much to talk about--you and
I. But, first, about the claim. You thought you were very wise with
your lying about not having a map. You thought to save the whole loaf
for yourself--you thought I was fool enough to believe you. If you had
let me in, you would have had half--now you have nothing. The claim is
all staked and filed, and the adjoining claims for a mile are staked
with the stakes of my friends--and you have nothing! You were the
fool! You couldn't have won against me. Failing in my story of
partnership with your father, I had intended to marry you, and failing
in that, I should have taken the map by force--for I knew you carried
it with you. But I dislike violence when the end may be gained by
other means, so I waited until, at last, happened the thing I knew
would happen--you became careless. You left your precious map and
photograph in plain sight upon your little table--and now you have
nothing." So he had not discovered the deception, but, through
accident or design, had seized this opportunity to gloat over her, and
taunt her with her loss. His carefully assumed mask of suave
courtliness had disappeared, and Patty realized that at last she was
face to face with the real Bethune, a creature so degenerate that he
boasted openly of having stolen her secret, as though the fact
redounded greatly to his credit.

A sudden rage seized her. She touched her horse with the spur: "Let me
pass!" she demanded, her lips white.

The man's answer was a sneering laugh, as he blocked her way: "Ho! not
so fast, my pretty! How about the Samuelson horse raid--your part in
it? Three of my best men are in hell because you tipped off that raid
to Vil Holland! How you found it out I do not know--but women, of a
certain kind, can find out anything from men. No doubt Clen, in some
sweet secret meeting place, poured the story into your ear, although
he denies it on his life."

"What do you mean?"

"Ha! Ha! Injured innocence!" He leered knowingly into her flashing
eyes: "It seems that everyone else knew what I did not. But, I am of a
forgiving nature. I will not see you starve. Leave the others and come
to me----"

"_You cur!_" The words cut like a swish of a lash, and again the man
laughed:

"Oh, not so fast, you hussy! I must admit it rather piqued me to be
bested in the matter of a woman--and by a soul-puncher. I was on hand
early that morning, to spy upon your movements, as was my custom. I
speak of the morning following the night that the very Reverend
Christie spent with you in your cabin. I should not have believed it
had I not seen his horse running unsaddled with your own. Also later,
I saw you come out of the cabin together. Then I damned myself for not
having reached out before and taken what was there for me to take."

With a low cry of fury, the girl drove her spurs into her horse's
sides. The animal leaped against Bethune's horse, forcing him aside.
The quarter-breed reached swiftly for her bridle reins, and as he
leaned forward with his arm outstretched, Patty summoned all her
strength and, whirling her heavy braided rawhide quirt high above her
head, brought it down with the full sweep of her muscular arm. The
feel of the blow was good as it landed squarely upon the inflamed
brutish face, and the shrill scream of pain that followed, sent a wild
thrill of joy to the very heart of the girl. Again, the lash swung
high, this time to descend upon the flank of her horse, and before
Bethune could recover himself, the frenzied animal shot up the valley,
running with every ounce there was in him.

The valley floor was fairly level, and a hundred yards away the girl
shot a swift glance over her shoulder. Bethune's horse was getting
under way in frantic leaps that told of cruel spurring, and with her
eyes to the front, she bent forward over the horn and slapped her
horse's neck with her gloved hand. She remembered with a quick gasp of
relief that Bethune prided himself upon the fact that he never carried
a gun. She had once taunted Vil Holland with the fact, and he had
replied that "greasers and breeds were generally sneaking enough to be
knife men." Again, she glanced over her shoulder and smiled grimly as
she noted that the distance between the two flying horses had
increased by half. "Good old boy," she whispered. "You can beat
him--can 'run rings around him,' as Vil would say. It would be a long
knife that could harm me now," she thought, as she pulled her Stetson
tight against the sweep of the rushing wind. The ground was becoming
more and more uneven. Loose rock fragments were strewn about in
increasing numbers, and the valley was narrowing to an extent that
necessitated frequent fording of the shallow creek. "He can't make any
better time than I can," muttered the girl, as she noted the
slackening of her horse's speed. She was riding on a loose rein,
giving her horse his head, for she realized that to force him might
mean a misstep and a fall. She closed her eyes and shuddered at the
thoughts of a fall. A thousand times better had she fallen and been
pounded to a pulp by the flying hoofs of the horse herd, than to fall
now--and survive it. The ascent became steeper. Her horse was still
running, but very slowly. His neck and shoulders were reeking with
sweat, and she could hear the labored breath pumping through his
distended nostrils.

A sudden fear shot through her. Nine valleys in every ten, she knew,
ended in surmountable divides; and she knew, also, that one valley in
every ten did not. Suppose this one that she had chosen at random
terminated in a cul-de-sac? The way became steeper. Running was out of
the question, and her horse was forging upward in a curious
scrambling walk. A noise of clattering rocks sounded behind her, and
Patty glanced backward straight into the face of Bethune. Reckless of
a fall, in the blind fury of his passion, the quarter-breed had forced
his horse to his utmost, and rapidly closed up the gap until scarcely
ten yards separated him from the fleeing girl.

In a frenzy of terror she lashed her laboring horse's flanks as the
animal dug and clawed like a cat at the loose rock footing of the
steep ascent. White to the lips she searched the foreground for a
ravine or a coulee that would afford a means of escape. But before her
loomed only the ever steepening wall, its surface half concealed by
the scattering scrub. Once more she looked backward. The breath was
whistling through the blood-red flaring nostrils of Bethune's horse,
and her glance flew to the face of the man. Never in her wildest
nightmares had she imagined the soul-curdling horror of that face. The
lips writhed back in a hideous grin of hate. A long blue-red welt
bisected the features obliquely--a welt from which red blood flowed
freely at the corner of a swollen eye. White foam gathered upon the
distorted lips and drooled down onto the chin where it mingled with
the blood in a pink meringue that dripped in fluffy chunks upon his
shirt front. The uninjured eye was a narrow gleam of venom, and the
breath swished through the man's nostrils as from the strain of great
physical labor.

"Oh, for my gun!" thought the girl. "I'd--I'd _kill_ him!" With a wild
scramble her horse went down. "Vil! Vil!" she shrieked, in a frenzy of
despair, and freeing herself from the floundering animal, she
struggled to her feet and faced her pursuer with a sharp rock fragment
upraised in her two hands.

Monk Bethune laughed--as the fiends must laugh in hell. A laugh that
struck a chill to the very heart of the girl. Her muscles went limp at
the sound of it and she felt the strength ebbing from her body like
sand from an upturned glass. The rock fragment became an insupportable
weight. It crashed to the ground, and rolled clattering to Bethune's
feet. He, too, had dismounted, and stood beside his horse, his fists
slowly clenching and unclenching in gloating anticipation. Patty
turned to run, but her limbs felt numb and heavy, and she pitched
forward upon her knees. With a slow movement of his hand, Bethune
wiped the pink foam from his chin, examined it, snapped it from his
fingers, cleansed them upon the sleeve of his shirt--and again,
deliberately, he laughed, and started to climb slowly forward.

A rock slipped close beside the girl, and the next instant a voice
sounded in her ear: "I don't reckon he's 'round yere, Miss. I hain't
saw Vil this mo'nin'." Rifle in hand, Watts stepped from behind a
scrub pine, and as his eyes fell upon Bethune, he stood fumbling his
beard with uncertain fingers.

"He--he'll kill me!" gasped the girl.

"Sho', now, Miss--he won't hurt yo' none, will yo', Mr. Bethune?
Gineral Jackson! Mr. Bethune, look at yo' face! Yo' must of rode
again' a limb!"

"Shut up, and get out of here!" screamed the quarter-breed. "And, if
you know what's good for you, you'll forget that you've seen anyone
this morning."

"B'en layin' up yere in the gap fer to git me a deer. I heerd yo'-all
comin', like, so's I waited."

"Get out, I tell you, before I kill you!" cried Bethune, beside
himself with rage. "Go!" The man's hand plunged beneath his shirt and
came out with a glitter of steel.

The mountaineer eyed the blade indifferently, and turned to the girl.
"Ef yo' goin' my ways, ma'am, jest yo' lead yo' hoss on ahaid. They's
a game trail runs slaunchways up th'ough the gap yender. I'll kind o'
foller 'long behind."

"You fool!" shrilled Bethune, as he made a grab for the girl's reins,
and the next instant found himself looking straight into the muzzle of
Watts's rifle.

"Drap them lines," drawled the mountaineer, "thet hain't yo' hoss. An'
what's over an' above, yo' better put up yo' whittle, an' tu'n 'round
an' go back wher' yo' com' from."

"Lower that gun!" commanded Bethune. "It's cocked!"

"Yes, hit's cocked, Mr. Bethune, an' hit's sot mighty light on the
trigger. Ef I'd git a little scairt, er a little riled, er my foot 'ud
slip, yo'd have to be drug down to wher' the diggin's easy, an'
buried."

Bethune deliberately slipped the knife back into his shirt, and
laughed: "Oh, come, now, Watts, a joke's a joke. I played a joke on
Miss Sinclair to frighten her----"

"Yo' done hit, all right," interrupted Watts. "An' thet's the end
on't."

The rifle muzzle still covered Bethune's chest in the precise region
of his heart, and once more he changed his tactics: "Don't be a fool,
Watts," he said, in an undertone, "I'm rich--richer than you, or
anyone else knows. I've located Rod Sinclair's strike and filed it. If
you just slip quietly off about your business, and forget that you
ever saw anyone here this morning--and see to it that you never
remember it again, you'll never regret it. I'll make it right with
you--I'll file you next to discovery."

"Yo' mean," asked Watts, slowly, "thet you've stoled the mine offen
Sinclair's darter, an' filed hit yo'self, an' thet ef I go 'way an'
let yo' finish the job by murderin' the gal, yo'll give me some of the
mine--is thet what yo' tryin' to git at?"

"Put it anyway you want to, damn you! Words don't matter, but for
God's sake, get out! If she once gets through the gap----"

"Bethune," Watts drawled the name, even more than was his wont, and
the quarter-breed noticed that the usually roving eyes had set into a
hard stare behind which lurked a dangerous glitter, "yo're a ornery,
low-down cur-dog what hain't fitten to be run with by man, beast, or
devil. I'd ort to shoot yo' daid right wher' yo' at--an' mebbe I will.
But comin' to squint yo' over, that there damage looks mo' like a
quirt-lick than a limb. Thet ort to hurt like fire fer a couple a
days, an' when it lets up yo' face hain't a-goin' to be so purty as
what hit wus. Ef she'd jest of drug the quirt along a little when hit
landed she c'd of cut plumb into the bone--but hit's middlin' fair, as
hit stands. I'm a-goin' to give yo' a chanct--an' a warnin', too. Next
time I see yo' I'm a-going' to kill yo'--whenever, or wherever hit's
at. I'll do hit, jest as shore as my name is John Watts. Yo' kin go
now--back the way yo' come, pervidin' yo' go fast. I'm a-goin' to
count up to wher' I know how to--I hain't never be'n to school none,
but I counted up to nineteen, onct--an' whin I git to wher' I cain't
rec'lec' the nex' figger, I'm a-goin' to shoot, an' shoot straight.
An' I hain't a-goin' to study long about them figgers, neither. Le's
see, one comes fust--yere goes, then: One ... Two...." For a single
instant, Bethune gazed into the man's eyes and the next, he sprang
into the saddle, and dashing wildly down the steep slope, disappeared
into the scrub.

"Spec' I'd ort to killed him," regretted the mountaineer, as he
lowered the rifle, and gazed off down the valley, "but I hain't got no
appetite fer diggin'."


CHAPTER XVIII

PATTY MAKES HER STRIKE


It was noon, one week from the day she had returned from the Samuelson
ranch, and Patty Sinclair stood upon the high shoulder of a butte and
looked down into a rock-rimmed valley. Her eyes roved slowly up and
down the depression where the dark green of the scrub contrasted
sharply with the crinkly buffalo grass, yellowed to spun gold beneath
the rays of the summer sun.

She reached up and stroked the neck of her horse. "Just think, old
partner, three days from now I may be teaching school in that horrid
little town with its ratty hotel, and its picture shows, and its
saloons, and you may be turned out in a pasture with nothing to do but
eat and grow fat! If we don't find our claim to-day, or to-morrow,
it's good-by hill country 'til next summer."

The day following her encounter with Bethune, Vil Holland had
appeared, true to his promise, and instructed her in the use of her
father's six-gun. At the end of an hour's practice, she had been able
to kick up the dirt in close proximity to a tomato can at fifteen
steps, and twice she had actually hit it. With so much being offered
by the newsboy outside the Vaudeville that is not at all funny, it would
be pleasant to find inside the doors a little relief from the world.

I will give the authors the benefit of any doubt I may have felt now
and then, and say that _My Aunt_ serves its purpose. In places it made
us all laugh a good deal, and I don't think we were prepared to be
easily amused; although (for a reason which still escapes me)
there was a sudden burst of clapping when _Aubrey Braxton_ announced
that he had received an "ultimatum" from _Suzanne_. The latter
part of the Second Act is particularly well worked up, and one remark
of _Aubrey's_ to _Leslie Tarbolton_ brought down the house. ("You are
the sort of man who would go to call on a sick friend ... and eat
his grapes.") The Third Act is terribly padded with things
which are not really funny, but it gives us an opportunity of seeing a
little more of Miss LOTTIE VENNE, to whom the authors had not
previously been generous. (I love Miss VENNE'S voice and I love her
manner of waving her arms in the air. It was delightful to see and
listen to her again.)
For the best parts of the first two Acts, then; for Miss LOTTIE VENNE'S
voice; above all, for Mr. A. W. BASKCOMB'S face, _My Aunt_ is worth
while. As _Aubrey Braxton_ Mr. BASKCOMB--the never-to-be-forgotten
_Slightly_ of so many Christmasses--goes through all the many troubles
of a hero of farce with his own inimitable air of hopeless resignation.

I hope that his efforts will not be unrewarded, and that the management
will find that, without rivalling the success of that other aunt,
Charley's, they will yet for some time be able to play to good "business
as usual."
M.

* * * * *
MR. PUNCH'S HOLIDAY STORIES.

III.--THE FIGHT OF THE CENTURY.

(Concluded.)
[_SYNOPSIS OF PRECEDING INSTALMENT:--The great boxing boom is at its
height. A fight arranged between Smasher Mike and the famous
heavyweight champion. Mauler Mills, is arousing intense excitement
throughout the country. Nothing whatever is known of the Smasher,
and the betting is therefore 100 to 1 against him. Young Lord Tamerton
is at this time in desperate financial straits. His bosom friend,
Ralph Wonderson, who is in love with his sister, the beautiful
Lady Margaret Tamerton, prevails upon him to wager heavily on Smasher
Mike, and undertakes to put him in the way of obtaining a loan of
£5,000 for this purpose. Their conversation is overheard by an agent
of Sir Ernest Scrivener,_ alias _Marmaduke Moorsdyke, who is the
mortal enemy of Wonderson and is plotting to get Lady Margaret Tamerton
in his power._]
The vast area of Corinthia was crammed with eager spectators, whose
eyes were concentrated with feverish intensity on the raised platform
in the centre of the hall. In the seats near the ring, for each
of which a hundred guineas had been charged, sat the cream of
Britain's aristocracy, including Lord Tamerton and Lady Margaret
Tamerton, for whom two tickets in a plain envelope had been left that
morning.

At last the preliminaries came to an end and Smasher Mike, clad in a
claret-coloured dressing-gown with yellow facings, crawled through the
ropes and went to his corner. As he raised his face to the lights a
murmur of amazement ran through the hall.

"_It's Ralph Wonderson!_" Lady Margaret gripped her brother's arm
till the perspiration stood out on his forehead.

"_It's Ralph Wonderson!_" The whisper passed from lip to lip, merging
presently into a burst of cheering as Mauler Mills scrambled up
to the platform, wearing an electric-blue dressing-gown with green
facings and pink sash.

Ralph sat motionless in his corner, watching his gigantic adversary
with a pleasant smile and softly whistling the air of a popular
song. At length the referee leisurely entered the ring. As he did so,
Ralph gave a violent start and Lady Margaret gripped her brother's
arm till his teeth chattered. _The referee was not the popular
Algernon Mittens, as had been announced, but Sir Ernest Scrivener!_

Lord Tamerton stared up at the ring with ashen lips. With such an
official in charge nothing but a miracle could save Ralph Wonderson
from being disqualified in the first round. The House of Tamerton
was more utterly ruined than ever.
But in thirty seconds Ralph, trained in many sports to meet all
emergencies, had summed up the situation and decided upon his course
of action.
The gong sounded and the two pugilists advanced warily towards each
other. Suddenly Ralph lashed out a terrific right which, as he
intended, missed the Mauler by a foot. Unable, apparently, to retain
his balance, he swung completely round with the impetus of the blow,
and his clenched fist landed squarely upon the referee's jaw. Sir
Ernest shot high over the ropes and crashed down on the Dowager
Duchess of Cumbersea, whence he rebounded with terrible force into
the arms of the Marquis of Meltington.Slipping from the horse, she fumbled at the pack
strings of the saddle and loosened the canvas bag. She reached into
it, and stood erect holding a light hand-axe. Once more she consulted
her map. "Stake l. c.," she read. "That's lode claim--and then that
funny wiggly mark, and then the word center." Her brows drew together
as she studied the ground. Suddenly her face brightened. "Why, of
course!" she exclaimed. "That mark represents the crack, and daddy
meant to stake the claim with the crack for the center. Well, here
goes!" She vehemently attacked a young sapling, and ten minutes later
viewed with pride her four roughly hacked stakes. Picking up one of
them and the axe, she paced off her distance, and as she reached the
first corner point, stared in surprise at the ground. The claim had
already been staked! Eagerly she stooped to examine the bit of wood.
It had evidently been in place for some time--how long, the girl could
not tell. Long enough, though, for its surface to have become
weather-grayed and discolored. "Daddy's stakes," she breathed softly,
and as her fingers strayed over the surface two big tears welled into
her eyes and trickled unheeded down her cheeks. "If he staked the
claim, I wonder why he didn't file," she puzzled over the matter for a
moment, and dismissed it. "I don't know why. But, anyway, the thing
for me to do is to get in my own stakes--only, I'll file, just as soon
as I can get to the register's office."

After considerable difficulty, she succeeded in planting her own stake
close beside the other, which marked the southwest corner of the claim, a
short time later the northwest corner was staked, and the girl stared again
at the rock wall. "Why, I've got to put in my eastern boundary stakes up on
top--three hundred feet back from the edge!" she exclaimed; "maybe I'll
find his notice on one of those stakes." It required only a moment to
locate a ravine that led to the top of the ledge which was not nearly so
high as the one that formed the opposite side of the valley. She found the
old stakes, but no sign of a notice. "The wind, and the snow, and the rain
have destroyed it long ago," she muttered. "And, now for my own notice."
Producing from her bag a pencil and a piece of paper, she wrote her
description and affixed it to a stake by means of a bit of wire. Then,
descending once more into the valley, she produced her luncheon and threw
herself down beside the little creek. It was mid-afternoon, and she
suddenly discovered that she was ravenously hungry. With her back against a
rock fragment, she sat and feasted her eyes upon her claim--hers--HERS! Her
thoughts flew backward to the enthusiasm of her father over this very
claim. She remembered how his eyes had lighted as he told her of its hidden
treasure. She remembered the jibes, and doubts, and covert sneers of the
Middleton people, her father's death, her own anger and revolt, when she
had suddenly decided, in the face of their council, entreaties, and
commands to take up his work where he had left it. With kaleidoscopic
rapidity her thoughts flew over the events of the ensuing months--the
meeting with Vil Holland, her disappointment in the Watts ranch, her eager
acceptance of the sheep camp, the long weary weeks of patiently riding
along rock walls, taking each valley in turn, the growing fear of running
out of funds before she could locate the claim. She shuddered as she
thought of Monk Bethune, and of how nearly she had fallen a victim to his
machinations. Her thoughts returned to Vil Holland, her "guardian devil of
the hills," who had turned out to be in reality a guardian angel in
disguise. "Very much in disguise," she smiled, "with his jug of whisky."
Nobody who had helped make up her little world of people in the hill
country was forgotten, the Thompsons, the Samuelsons, and the Wattses--she
thought of them all. "Why, I--I love every one of them," she cried, as
though the discovery surprised her. "They're all, every one of them, real
friends--they're not like the others, the smug, sleek, best citizens of
Middleton. And I'll not forget one of them. We'll file that whole vein from
one end to the other!" Catching up her horse, she mounted, and sat for a
moment irresolute. "I could make town, sometime to-night," she mused, and
then her eyes rested for a moment upon her horse's neck where the white
alkali dust lay upon the rough, sweat-dried hair. "No," she decided. "We'll
go back to the cabin, and you can rest up, and to-morrow we'll start at
daylight."

"Mr. Christie was right," she smiled, as she took the back trail for
Monte's Creek. "I don't have to teach school. But, I wonder how he
could have gotten that 'hunch,' as he called it? When I've been
searching for the claim for months?"

In a little valley that ran parallel to Monte's Creek, Patty
encountered Microby Dandeline. The girl was lying stretched at full
length upon the ground and did not notice her approach until she was
almost on her, then she leaped to her feet, regarded her for a moment,
and, with a frightened cry, sprang into the bush and scrambled out of
sight along the steep side of a ravine. In vain Patty called, but her
only answer was the diminishing sounds of the girl's scrambling
flight. "What in the world has got into her of late," she wondered, as
she proceeded on her way. Certain it was that the girl avoided her,
not only at the Watts ranch, but whenever they had chanced to meet in
the hills. At first she had attributed it to anger or resentment over
her own treatment of her when she had tried to get possession of the
map. But, surely, even the dull-witted Microby must know that the
incident had been forgotten. "No," she decided, "there is something
else." Somehow, the girl no longer seemed the simple child-like
creature of the wild. There was a furtiveness about her, and she had
developed a certain crafty side glance, as though constantly seeking a
means of escape from something. Her mother had noticed the change,
and had confided to Patty that she was "gittin' mo' triflin' every
day, a-rammin' 'round the hills a-huntin' her a mine." "There's
something worrying her," muttered the girl. "Something that she don't
dare tell anyone, and it's sapping what little wit she has."

It was late that evening when Patty ate her solitary supper. The sun
had long set, and the dusk of the late twilight had settled upon the
valley of Monte's Creek as she wiped the last dish and set it upon the
shelf of her tiny cupboard. Suddenly she looked up. A form darkened
the doorway, and quick as a flash, her eyes sought the six-gun that
lay in its holster upon the bunk.

"You won't need that." The voice was reassuring. It was Vil Holland's
voice; she had recognized him a second before he spoke and greeted him
with a smile, even as she wondered what had brought him there. Only
three times before had he come to her cabin, once to ascertain who was
moving into the sheep camp, once when he had pitched Lord Clendenning
into the creek, and again, only a few days before, when he had come to
teach her to shoot. The girl noted that he seemed graver than usual,
if that were possible. Certain it was that he appeared to be holding
himself under restraint. She wondered if he had come to warn her of
the proximity of Bethune.

"I was in town, to-day," he came directly to the point. "An' Len
Christie told me you're goin' to teach school." He paused and his eyes
rested upon her face as if seeking confirmation.

Patty laughed; she could afford to laugh, now that the necessity for
teaching did not exist. "I asked him if he could find a school for me
sometime ago," she replied, trying to fathom what was in his mind.

There was a moment of silence, during which Patty saw the man's
fingers tighten upon his hat brim. "I don't want you to do that. It
ain't fit work--for you--teachin' other folks' kids."

Patty stared at him in surprise. The words had come slowly, and at
their conclusion he had paused.

"Maybe you could suggest some work that is more fit?"

The man ignored the hint of sarcasm. "Yes--I think I can." His head
was slightly bowed, and Patty saw that it was with an effort he
continued: "That is, I don't know if I can make you see it like I do.
It's awful real to me--an' plain. Miss Sinclair, I can't make any fine
speeches like they do in books. I wouldn't if I could--it ain't my
way. I love you more than I could tell you if I knew all the words in
the language, an' how to fit 'em together. I loved you that day I
first saw you--back there on the divide at Lost Creek. You was afraid
of me, an' you wouldn't show it, an' you wouldn't own up that you was
lost--'til I'd made the play of goin' off an' leavin' you. An' I've
loved you every minute since--an' every minute since, I've fought
against lovin' you. But, it's no use. The more I fight it, the
stronger it gets. It's stronger than I am. I can't down it. It's the
first time I ever ran up against anything I couldn't whip." Again he
paused. Patty advanced a step, and her eyes glowed softly as they
rested upon the form that stood in her doorway silhouetted against the
after-glow. She saw Buck rub his velvet nose affectionately up and
down the man's sleeve, and into her heart leaped a great longing for
this man who, with the unconscious dignity of the vast open places
upon him, had told her so earnestly of his love. She opened her lips
to speak but there was a great lump in her throat, and no words came.

"That's why," he continued, "I know it ain't just a flash in the
pan--this love of mine ain't. All summer I've watched you, an' the
hardest thing I ever had to do was to set back an' let you play a
lone hand against the worst devil that ever showed his face in the
hills. But the way things stacked up, I had to. You had me sized up
for the one that was campin' on your trail, an' anything I'd have done
would have played into Bethune's hand. I know I ain't fit for you--no
man is. But, I'll always do the best I know how by you--an' I'll
always love you. As for the rest of it, I never saved any money. I
know there's gold here in the hills, an' I've spent years huntin' it.
I'll find it, too--sometime. But, I ain't exactly a pauper, either.
I've got my two hands, an' I've got a contract with Old Man Samuelson
to winter his cattle. I didn't want to do it first, but the figure he
named was about twice what I thought the job was worth. I told him so
right out, an' he kind of laughed an' said maybe I'd need it all, an'
anyhow, them cattle was all grade Herefords, an' was worth more to
winter than common dogies. So, you see, we could winter through, all
right, an' next summer, we could prospect together. The gold's here,
somewhere--your dad knew it--an' I know it."

Receiving no answering pat, the buckskin left off his nuzzling of the
man's sleeve, and turned from the doorway. As he did so the brown
leather jug scraped lightly against the jamb. The girl's eyes flew to
the jug, and swiftly back to the man who stood framed in the doorway.
She loved him! For days and days she had known that she loved him, and
for days and nights her thoughts had been mostly of him--this
unsmiling knight of the saddle--her "guardian devil of the hills."
Without exception, the people whose regard was worth having respected
him, and liked him, even though they deplored his refusal to accept
steady work. They're just like the people back home, she thought. They
have no imagination. To their minds the cowpuncher who draws his forty
dollars a month, year in and year out, is in some manner more
dependable than the man whose imagination and love of the boundless
open lead him to stake his time against millions. What do they know of
the joys and the despairs of uncertainty? In a measure they, too, love
the plains and the hills--but their love of the open is inextricably
interwoven with their preconceived ideas of conduct. But, Vil Holland
is bound by no such convention; his "outfit," a pack horse to carry
it, and his home--all outdoors! Her father had imagination, and year
after year, in the face of the taunts and jibes of his small town
neighbors, he had steadfastly allowed his imagination full sway, and
at last--he had won. She had adored her father from whom she had
inherited her love of the wild. But--there was the jug! Always her
thoughts of Vil Holland had led up to that brown leather jug until she
had come to hate it with an unreasoning hatred.

"I see you have not forgotten your jug."

"No, I got it filled in town." The man's reply was casual, as he would
have mentioned his gloves, or his hat.

"You said you had never run up against anything you couldn't whip,
except--except----"

"Yes, except my love for you. That's right--an' I never expect to."

"How about that jug? Can you whip that?"

"Why, yes, I could. If there was any need. I never tried it."

"Suppose you try it for a while, and see."

The man regarded her seriously. "You mean, if I leave off packin' that
jug, you'll----"

"I haven't promised anything." The girl laughed a trifle nervously.
"But, I will tell you this much. I utterly despise a drunkard!"

Vil Holland nodded slowly. "Let's get the straight of it," he said.
"I didn't know--I didn't realize it was really hurtin' me any. Can you
see that it does? Have I ever done anything that you know of, or have
heard tell of, that a sober man wouldn't do?"

The girl felt her anger rising. "Nobody can drink as much as you do,
and not be the worse for it. Don't try to defend yourself."

"No, I wouldn't do that. You see, if it's hurtin' me, there wouldn't
be any defense--an' if it ain't, I don't need any."

For an instant Patty regarded the man who stood framed in the doorway.
"Clean-blooded," the doctor had called him, and clean-blooded he
looked--the very picture of health and rugged strength, clear of eye
and firm of jaw, not one slightest hint or mark of the toper could she
detect, and the realization that this was so, angered her the more.

Abruptly, she changed the subject, and the moment the brown leather
jug was banished from her mind, her anger subsided. In the doorway,
Vil Holland noted the undercurrent of suppressed excitement in her
voice as she said: "I have the most wonderful news! I--_I found
daddy's mine!_" Seconds passed as the man stood waiting for her to
proceed. "I found it to-day," she continued, without noting that his
lean brown hand gripped the hat brim even more tightly than before,
nor that his lips were pressed into a thin straight line. "And my
stakes are all in, and in the morning I'm going to file."

Vil Holland interrupted. "You--you say you located Rod Sinclair's
strike? You really located it?" Somehow, his voice sounded different.

The girl sensed the change without defining it. "Yes, I really found
it!" she answered. "Do you want to know where?" Hastily she turned to
the cupboard and taking a match from a box, lighted the lamp. "You
see," she laughed, "I am not afraid to trust you. I'm going to show
you daddy's map, and his photographs, and the samples. Oh, if you knew
how I've hunted and hunted through these hills for that rock wall! You
see, the map was like so much Greek to me, until I happened by
accident to learn how to read it. Before that, I just rode up and down
the valleys hunting for the wall with the broad crooked crack in it.
Here it is." The man had advanced to the table, and was bending over
the two photographs, examining them minutely. "And here's his map." He
picked up the paper and for several minutes studied the penciled
directions. Then he laid it down, and turned his attention to the
samples.

"High grade," he appraised, and returned them to the table beside the
photographs. "So, you don't have to teach school," he said, speaking
more to himself than to her. "An' you'll be goin' out of the hill
country for good an' all. There's nothin' here for you, now that
you've got what you come after. You'll be goin' back--East."

Patty laughed, and as Vil Holland looked into her face he saw that her
eyes held dancing lights. "I'm not going back East," she said. "I've
learned to love--the hill country. I have learned that--perhaps--there
is more here for me than--than even daddy's mine."

Vil Holland shook his head. "There's nothin' for you in the hills," he
repeated, slowly, and abruptly extended his hand. "I'm glad for your
sake your luck changed, Miss Sinclair. I hope the gold you take out of
there will bring you happiness. You've earnt it--every cent of it, an'
you've got it, an' now, as far as the hill country goes--the books are
closed. Good-night, I must be goin', now."

Abruptly as he had offered his hand, he withdrew it, and turning,
stepped through the door, mounted his horse, and rode out into the
night.


CHAPTER XIX

THE RACE FOR THE REGISTER


Beside the little table Patty Sinclair listened to the sound of hoofs
splashing through the shallows of the creek and thudding dully upon
the floor of the valley beyond. When the sounds told her that the
horseman had disappeared into the timber, she walked slowly to the
door, and leaning her arm against the jamb, stared for a long time
into the black sweep of woods that concealed the trail that led upward
to the notch in the hills, just discernible against the sky where the
stars showed through the last faint blush of after-glow in winking
points of gold.

"Nothing here for me," she repeated dully. "Nothing but trees, and
hills--and gold. He loves me," she laughed bitterly. "And yet, between
me, and his jug, he chose--the jug." She closed the door, slipped the
bar into place, thrust the photographs and map into her pocket, and
threw herself face downward upon the bunk. And, in the edge of the
timber, Vil Holland turned his horse slowly about and headed him up
the ravine. At the notch in the hills he slipped to the ground and,
throwing an arm across the saddle, removed his Stetson and let the
night wind ripple his hair. Standing alone in the night with his
soul-hurt, he gazed far downward where a tiny square of yellow light
marked the window of the cabin.

"It's hell--the way things work out," he said, thoughtfully. "Yes,
sir, Buck, it sure is hell. If Len had told me a week ago about her
havin' to teach school, or even yesterday--she might have--But,
now--she's rich. An' that cracked rock claim turnin' out to be
_hers_--" He swung abruptly into the saddle and headed the buckskin
for camp.

Patty spent a miserable night. Brief periods of sleep were
interspersed with long periods of wakefulness in which her brain
traveled wearily over and over a long, long trail that ended always at
a brown leather jug that swung by a strap from a saddle horn. She had
found her father's claim--had accomplished the thing she had started
out to accomplish--had vindicated her father's judgment in the eyes of
the people back home--had circumvented the machinations of Bethune,
and in all probability, the moment that she recorded her claim would
be the possessor of more gold than she could possibly spend--and in
the achievement there was no joy. There was a dull hurt in her heart,
and the future stretched away, uninviting, heart-sickening,
interminable. The world looked drab.

She ate her breakfast by lamplight, and as objects began to take form
in the pearly light of the new day, she saddled her horse and rode up
the trail to the notch in the hills--the trail that was a short cut,
and that would carry her past Vil Holland's little white tent,
nestling close beside its big rock at the edge of the little plateau.
"He will still be asleep, and I can take one more look at the far snow
mountains from the spot that might have been the porch of--our cabin."

Carefully keeping to the damp ground that bordered the little creek,
she worked her way around the huge rock, and drew up in amazement. 
RICARDOS. The middle of Octobare last.

TWISDEN. [Suddenly looking up] Mr Ricardos, was it Captain Dancy?

RICARDOS. [Again wiping his forehead] Gentlemen, I am so fond of
my daughter.

I have only the one, and no wife.

TWISDEN. [With an effort] Yes, yes; but I must know.

RICARDOS. Sare, if I tell you, will you give me your good word
that my daughter shall not hear of it?

TWISDEN. So far as we are able to prevent it--certainly.

RICARDOS. Sare, I trust you.--It was Captain Dancy.

A long pause.

GRAVITER [Suddenly] Were you blackmailing him?

TWISDEN.

[Holding up his hand] My partner means, did you press him for this
settlement?

RICARDOS.

I did think it my duty to my daughter to ask that he make compensation
to her.

TWISDEN. With threats that you would tell his wife?

RICARDOS. [With a shrug] Captain Dancy was a man of honour. He said:

"Of course I will do this." I trusted him. And a month later I did
remind him, and he gave me this money for her. I do not know where
he got it--I do not know. Gentlemen, I have invested it all on her--every
penny-except this note, for which I had the purpose to buy her a
necklace. That is the sweared truth.

TWISDEN. I must keep this note. [He touches the hundred-pound note]
You will not speak of this to anyone. I may recognise that you were
a holder for value received--others might take a different view.
Good-day, sir. Graviter, see Mr Ricardos out, and take his address.

RICARDOS. [Pressing his hands over the breast of his frock coat--with
a sigh] Gentlemen, I beg you--remember what I said. [With a roll of his
eyes] My daughter--I am not happee. Good-day.

He turns and goes out slowly, Left Forward, followed by
GRAVITER.

TWISDEN. [To himself] Young Dancy! [He pins the two notes together
and places them in an envelope, then stands motionless except for
his eyes and hands, which restlessly express the disturbance within
him.]
GRAVITER returns, carefully shuts the door, and going up to him, hands
him RICARDOS' card.

[Looking at the card] Villa Benvenuto. This will have to be verified,
but I'm afraid it's true. That man was not acting.

GRAVITER. What's to be done about Dancy?

TWISDEN. Can you understand a gentleman--?

GRAVITER. I don't know, sir. The war loosened "form" all over the
place. I saw plenty of that myself. And some men have no moral
sense.
From the first I've had doubts.

TWISDEN. We can't go on with the case.
GRAVITER. Phew! . . . [A moment's silence] Gosh! It's an awful thing
for his wife.

TWISDEN. Yes.
GRAVITER [Touching the envelope] Chance brought this here, sir.
That man won't talk--he's too scared.

TWISDEN. Gilman.
GRAVITER. Too respectable. If De Levis got those notes back, and
the rest of the money, anonymously?
TWISDEN. But the case, Graviter; the case.
GRAVITER. I don't believe this alters what I've been thinking.
TWISDEN. Thought is one thing--knowledge another. There's duty to
our profession. Ours is a fine calling. On the good faith of
solicitors a very great deal hangs. [He crosses to the hearth as
if warmth would help him].
GRAVITER. It'll let him in for a prosecution. He came to us in
confidence.

TWISDEN. Not as against the law.
GRAVITER. No. I suppose not. [A pause] By Jove, I don't like losing
this case. I don't like the admission we backed such a wrong
'un.
TWISDEN. Impossible to go on. Apart from ourselves, there's Sir
Frederic. We must disclose to him--can't let him go on in the
dark.
Complete confidence between solicitor and counsel is the essence
of professional honour.
GRAVITER. What are you going to do then, sir?
TWISDEN. See Dancy at once. Get him on the phone.
GRAVITER. [Taking up the telephone] Get me Captain Dancy's flat. .
. .
What? . . .[To TWISDEN] Mrs Dancy is here. That's a propos with a
vengeance. Are you going to see her, sir?
TWISDEN. [After a moment's painful hesitation] I must.
GRAVITER. [Telephoning] Bring Mrs Dancy up. [He turns to the
window].
MABEL DANDY is shown in, looking very pale. TWISDEN advances from
the fire, and takes her hand.
MABEL. Major Colford's taken Ronny off in his car for the night. I
thought it would do him good.Somethin' wrong?"

The girl laughed, a dry hard laugh, and raising her head, looked into
the man's face. "Oh, no!" she said. "Nothing's wrong--nothing except
that I've lost my father's claim--lost it because I relied on your
horse to carry me into town in time to file ahead of _him_."

"Lost yer pa's claim?" cried Thompson. "What do you mean--lost? Has
that devil dared to show his face after the horse raid?" He paused
suddenly and smiled. "Now don't you go worryin' about that there
claim. Vil Holland's on the job! I know'd there was somethin' in the
wind when he come a-larrupin' in here an' jerked his kak offen Buck
an' throw'd it on Lightnin' without hardly a word. Vil, he'll head
him! An' when he does, Bethune'll be lucky if he lives long enough to
git hung!"

"Bethune! Bethune!" cried the girl bitterly. "Bethune's got nothing to
do with it! It's Vil Holland himself that's going to file my claim.
Have you got another horse here?" she cried. "If you have I want him.
I'm not beaten yet! There's still a chance! Maybe Lightning will go
down, or something. Quick--change my saddle!"

Catching up a rope, Thompson ran to the corral and throwing his loop
over the head of a horse led him out and transferred the girl's saddle
and bridle.

"I don't git the straight of it," he said, eying her with a puzzled
frown. "But if it's a question of gittin' to town before Vil Holland
kin beat you out of yer claim--you've got plenty of time--if you
walk."

Patty shot the man one glance of withering scorn. "You're all _crazy_!
He's got you hypnotized! Everybody thinks he's a saint----"

Thompson grinned. "No, Miss, Vil ain't no saint--an' he ain't no
devil--neither. But somewheres between the two of 'em is the place
where good men fits in--an' that's Vil. You're all het up needless,
an' barkin' up the wrong tree, as folks used to say back where I come
from. Just come and have a talk with Miz T. She'll straighten you
around all right. I'll slip in an' tell her to set the coffee-pot on,
an' you kin take yer time about gittin' to town." Thompson disappeared
into the kitchen, and a moment later when he returned with his wife,
the two stared in amazement at the flying figure that was just
swinging from the lane into the long white trail.

Hours later the girl crossed the Mosquito Flats, forded the river, and
passed along the sandy street of the town. Her eyes felt hot and tired
from continual straining ahead in a vain effort to catch a glimpse of
a fallen horse, whose rider must continue his way on foot. But the
plain was deserted, and the only evidence that anyone had proceeded
her was an occasional glimpse of hoof prints in the white dust of the
trail.

A short distance up the street, standing "tied to the ground" before
the hitching rail of a little false-front saloon, was Lightning. Patty
noted as she passed that he showed signs of hard riding, and that the
inevitable jug dangled motionless from the saddle horn. Her lips
stiffened, and her hand tightened on the bridle reins, as she forced
her eyes to the front. Farther on, she could see the little
white-painted frame office of the register. She would pass it by--no
use for her to go there. She must find Len Christie and tell him she
had come to teach his school. A great wave of repugnance swept over
her, engulfed her, as her eyes traveled over the rows of small wooden
houses with their stiff, uncomfortable porches, their treeless yards,
and their flaunting paintiness.

"And to think, that I've got to _live_ in one of them!" she murmured,
dully. "Nothing could be worse--except the hotel."

Opposite the register's office she pulled up, and gazed in fascination
at the open door. Then deliberately she reined her horse to the
sidewalk and dismounted. The characteristic thoroughness that had
marked the progress of her search for her father's claim, and had
impelled her to return to the false claim and procure the notice, and
that very morning had prompted her to ride against the slender chance
of Vil Holland's meeting with a mishap, impelled her now to read for
herself the entry of her father's strike.

The register shoved his black skull-cap a trifle back upon his shiny
head, adjusted his thick eyeglasses, and smiled into the face of the
girl. "Things must be looking up out in the hills," he hazarded.
"You're the second one to-day and it ain't noon yet."

"I presume Mr. Holland has been here."

"Yes, Vil come in. I guess he's around somewheres. He----"

"Relinquished one claim and filed another?"

"That's just what he done."

Patty nodded wearily. She was gamely trying to appear disinterested.

"Did you want to file?" asked the man, whirling a large book about,
and pushing it toward her. "Just enter your description there, an'
fill out the application fer a patent, an' file your field notes, and
plat."

The girl's glance strayed listlessly over the adjoining page, her eyes
mechanically taking in the words. Suddenly, she became intensely
alert. She leaned over the book and reread with feverish interest the
written description. The location was filed in Vil Holland's
name--but, _the description was not of her claim_!

"Where--where is this claim?" she gasped.

The old register turned the book and very deliberately proceeded to
read the description. In her nervous excitement Patty felt that she
must scream, and her fingers clutched the counter edge until the
knuckles whitened. Finally the man looked up. "That must be somewheres
over on the Blackfoot side," he announced. "Must be Vil's figuring on
pulling over there. Too bad we won't be seeing him much no more." He
swung the book back, as the import of his words dawned upon the girl
she leaned weakly against the counter.

"Ain't you feeling well?" asked the old man, eying her with concern.

Without hearing him Patty picked up the pen, and as she wrote, her
hand trembled so that she could scarcely form the letters. At last it
was done, and the register once again swung the book and read the
freshly penned words.

"Well, I'll be darned!" he exclaimed, when he had finished.

The blood had rushed back into the girl's face and she was regarding
him with shining eyes. "What's the matter? Isn't it right? Because if
it isn't you can show me how to do it, and I'll fix it."

"Oh it's right--all right." He was eying her quizzically. "Only it's
blamed funny. That there's the claim Vil Holland just relinquished."

"_Just relinquished!_" gasped the girl, reaching out and shaking the
old man's sleeve in her excitement. "What do you mean? Tell me!"

"Mean just what I said--here's the entry."

"Vil--Holland--just--relinquished," she repeated, in a dazed voice.
"When did he file it?"

"I don't recollect--it was back in the winter, or spring." The man
began to turn the pages slowly backward. "Here it is, March, the
thirteenth."

"Why, that was before I came out here!"

"How?"

"Why did he relinquish?" The words rushed eagerly from her lips, and
she awaited breathless, for the answer.

If they were to remain so it was best perhaps that I should go. Why
should I unsettle this domestic peace?

Even against my own will my mere presence and appearance might have their
effect upon the lady. No, no, I must tear myself away--even her persuasions
were unable to make me stop.
Years afterward I heard that the household of the Dacres was among
the happiest in the whole country, and that no cloud had ever come
again to darken their lives.

Yet I dare say if he could have seen into his wife's mind--but
there, I say no more! A lady's secret is her own, and I fear that she
and it are buried long years ago in some Devonshire churchyard.

Perhaps all that gay circle are gone and the Lady Jane only lives now
in the memory of an old half-pay French brigadier. He at least can
never forget.

VI. How the Brigadier Rode to Minsk
I would have a stronger wine to-night, my friends, a wine of Burgundy
rather than of Bordeaux. It is that my heart, my old soldier heart,
is heavy within me. It is a strange thing, this age which creeps upon
one.
One does not know, one does not understand; the spirit is ever the same,
and one does not remember how the poor body crumbles. But there
comes a moment when it is brought home, when quick as the sparkle of
a whirling sabre it is clear to us, and we see the men we were and the
men we are. Yes, yes, it was so to-day, and I would have a wine of
Burgundy to-night. White Burgundy--Montrachet--Sir, I am your
debtor!

It was this morning in the Champ de Mars. Your pardon, friends, while
an old man tells his trouble. You saw the review.

Was it not splendid? I was in the enclosure for veteran officers who
have been decorated.

This ribbon on my breast was my passport. The cross itself I keep at
home in a leathern pouch. They did us honour, for we were placed
at the saluting point, with the Emperor and the carriages of the Court
upon our right.

It is years since I have been to a review, for I cannot approve of
many things which I have seen.

I do not approve of the red breeches of the infantry. It was in
white breeches that the infantry used to fight.

Red is for the cavalry.

A little more, and they would ask our busbies and our
spurs! Had I been seen at a review they might well have said that
I, Etienne Gerard, had condoned it.

So I have stayed at home. But this war of the Crimea is different. The
men go to battle.

It is not for me to be absent when brave men gather.

My faith, they march well, those little infantrymen!

They are not large, but they are very solid and they carry themselves
well. I took off my hat to them as they passed. Then there came the
guns. They were good guns, well horsed and well manned. I took off
my hat to them. Then came the Engineers, and to them also I took
off my hat. There are no braver men than the Engineers. Then came
the cavalry, Lancers, Cuirassiers, Chasseurs, and Spahis. To all
of them in turn I was able to take off my hat, save only to the
Spahis.
The Emperor had no Spahis. But when all of the others had passed,
what think you came at the close? A brigade of Hussars, and at the
charge!
Oh, my friends, the pride and the glory and the beauty, the flash
and the sparkle, the roar of the hoofs and the jingle of chains,
the tossing manes, the noble heads, the rolling cloud, and the
dancing waves of steel!I'd have relinquished it anyway, as soon as I'd located
another."

"But, you knew it was rich when you did relinquish it."

"A man couldn't hardly do different, could he?"

"Oh, Vil," there were tears in the girl's eyes, and she did not try to
conceal them. The words trembled on her lips. "A man couldn't--your
kind of a man! But--they're so hard to find. Don't--don't rob me of
mine--now that I've found him!"

A shrill whistle tore the words from her lips. She glanced up,
startled, to see Vil Holland take his fingers from his teeth. She
followed his gaze, and a block away, in front of the wooden
post-office, saw the Reverend Len Christie whirl in his tracks. The
cowboy motioned him to wait, and taking the girl gently by the arm,
turned her about, and together they walked toward the "Bishop of All
Outdoors," who awaited them with twinkling eyes.

"It's about the school, I presume," he greeted. "Everything is all
arranged, Miss Sinclair. You may assume your duties to-morrow."

"If I was you, Len," replied Vil Holland, dryly, "I wouldn't go
bettin' much on that presoomer of yours--it ain't workin' just right,
an' Miss Sinclair has decided to assoom her duties to-day. So, havin'
disposed of presoom, an' assoom, we'll rezoom, as you'd say if you was
dealin' from the pulpit, an' if you ain't got anything more important
on your mind, we'll just walk over to the church an' get married."

The Reverend Len Christie regarded his friend solemnly. "I didn't
think it of you, Vil--when I bragged to you yesterday about the
excellent teacher I'd got--I didn't think you would slip right out and
get her away from me!"

"Oh, I'm so sorry! Really, Mr. Christie, I didn't mean to disappoint
you in this way, at the last minute----"

"Don't you go wastin' any sympathy on that old renegade," cut in Vil.

"That's right," laughed Christie, noting the genuine concern in the
girl's eyes. "As a matter of fact, I have in mind a substitute who
will be tickled to death to learn that she is to have the regular
position. Didn't I tell you out at the Samuelsons' that I had a hunch
you'd make your strike before school time? Of course, everyone knows
that Vil is the one who made the real strike, but you'll find that the
claim you've staked isn't so bad, and that after you get down through
the surface, you will run onto a whole lot of pure gold."

Patty who had been regarding him with a slightly puzzled expression
suddenly caught his allusion, and she smiled happily into the face of
her cowboy. "I've already found pure gold," she said, "and it lies
mighty close to the surface."

In the little church after the hastily summoned witnesses had
departed, the Reverend Len Christie stood holding a hand of each.
"Never in my life have I performed a clerical office that gave me so
much genuine happiness and satisfaction," he announced.

"Me, neither," assented Vil Holland, heartily, and, then--"Hold on,
Len. You're too blame young an' good lookin' for such tricks--an'
besides, I've never kissed her, myself, yet----!"

"Where will it be now?" asked Holland, when they found themselves once
more upon the street.

"Home--dear," whispered his wife. "You know we've got to get that
cabin up before snow flies--our cabin, Vil--with the porch that will
look out over the snows of the changing lights."

"If the whole town didn't have their heads out the window, watchin' us
I'd kiss you right here," he answered, and strode off to lead her
horse up beside his own.

Swinging her into the saddle, he was about to mount Lightning, when
she leaned over and raised the brown leather jug on its thong. "Why,
it's empty!" she exclaimed.

"So it is," agreed Holland, with mock concern.

"Really, Vil, I don't care--so much. If it don't hurt men any more
than it has hurt you, I won't quarrel with it. I'll wait while you get
it filled."

"Maybe I'd better," he said, and swinging it from the saddle horn,
crossed the street and entered the general store. A few minutes later
he returned and swung the jug into place.

"Why! Do they sell whisky at the store? I thought you got that at a
saloon."

"Whisky!" The man looked up in surprise. "This jug never held any
whisky! It's my vinegar jug. I don't drink."

Patty stared at him in amazement. "Do you mean to tell me you carry a
jug of vinegar with you wherever you go?"

For the first time since she had known him she saw that his eyes were
twinkling, and that his lips were very near a smile. "No, not exactly,
but, you see, that first time I met you I happened to be riding from
town with this jug full of vinegar. I noticed the look you gave it,
an' it tickled me most to death. So, after that, every time I figured
I'd meet up with you I brought the jug along. I'd pour out the vinegar
an' fill it up with water, an' sometimes I'd just pack it empty--then
when I'd hit town, I'd get it filled again. I bet Johnson, over there,
thinks I'm picklin' me a winter's supply of prickly pears. I must have
bought close to half a barrel of vinegar this summer."

"Vil Holland! You carried that jug--went to all that trouble, just
to--to _tease_ me?"

"That's about the size of it. An' Gosh! How you hated that jug."

"It might have--it nearly did, make me hate _you_, too."

"'Might have,' an' 'nearly,' an' 'if,' are all words about alike--they
all sort of fall short of amountin' to anythin'. It 'might have'--but,
somehow, things don't work out that way. The only thing that counts
is, it didn't."

Out on the trail they met Watts riding toward town. "Wher's Microby?"
he asked, addressing Patty.

"Microby! I haven't seen Microby since early this morning. She was
riding down a coulee not far from Vil's camp."

"Didn't yo' send for her?"

"I certainly did not!"

The man's hand fumbled at his beard. "Bethune was along last evenin'
an' hed a talk with her, an' then he done tol' Ma yo' wanted Microby
should come up to yo' place, come daylight. When I heern it, I
mistrusted yo' wouldn't hev no truck with Bethune, so after I done the
chores, I rode up ther'. They wasn't no one to hum." The simple-minded
man looked worried. "Bethune, he could do anything he wants with her.
She thinks he's grand--but, I know different. Then I met up with Lord
Clendennin' in the canyon, an' he tol' me how Bethune wus headin' fer
Canady. He said, had I lost anythin'. An' I said 'no,' an' he laffed
an' says he guess that's right."

As Vil Holland listened, his eyes hardened, and at the conclusion,
something very like an oath ground from his lips. Patty glanced at him
in surprise--never before had she seen him out of poise.

"You go back home," he advised Watts, in a kindly tone, "to the wife
and the kids. I'll find Microby for you!"

When the man had passed from sight into the dip of a coulee, Vil
leaned over and, drawing his wife close to his breast, kissed her lips
again and again. "It's too bad, little girl, that our honeymoon's got
to be broke into this way, but you remember I told you once that if I
won you'd have to be satisfied with what you got. You didn't know what
I meant, then, but you know, now--an' I'm goin' to win again! I'm
goin' to find that child! The poor little fool!" Patty saw that his
eyes were flashing, and his voice sounded hard:

"You ride back to town and tell Len to get his white goods together
an' ride back with you to Watts's. There's goin' to be a funeral--or
better yet, a weddin' _an'_ a funeral in it for him by this time
to-morrow, or my name ain't Vil Holland!" And then, abruptly, he
turned and rode into the North.

A wild impulse to overtake him and dissuade him from his purpose took
possession of the girl. But the thought of Microby in the power of
Bethune, and of the sorrowing face of poor Watts stayed her. She saw
her husband hitch his belt forward and swiftly look to his six-gun,
and as the sound of galloping hoofs grew fainter, she watched his
diminishing figure until it was swallowed up in the distance.

Impulsively she stretched out her arms to him: "Good luck to you, my
knight!" she called, but the words ended in a sob, and she turned her
horse and, with a vast happiness in her heart, rode back toward the
town.


THE END.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE TEXAN

A Story of the Cattle Country

By

James B. Hendryx

Author of "The Promise," etc.


     A novel of the cattle country and of the mountains, by James
     B. Hendryx, will at once commend itself to the host of
     readers who have enthusiastically followed this brilliant
     writer's work. Again he has written a red-blooded, romantic
     story of the great open spaces, of the men who "do" things
     and of the women who are brave--a tale at once turbulent and
     tender, impassioned but restrained.


G. P. Putnam's Sons

Now York London

       *       *       *       *       *


The Gun-Brand

By

James B. Hendryx

Author of "The Promise," etc.

_12^o. Picture Wrapper and Color Frontispiece_

_$1.50 net. By mail, $1.65_


     A novel of the Northwest, where civilization and savagery
     lock in the death struggle; where men of iron hearts are
     molded by a woman's tenderness; where knave and knight cross
     the barriers to confront each other in the great reckoning;
     where nobility and courage throw down the gage to evil and
     intrigue, and the gun-brand leaves its seared and indelible
     impress upon the brow of a scoundrel. "You were born a savage
     and you will die one," said I.

My words stung him, for he broke into an oath, raising his whip as
if he would strike me.

"Silence, you crop-eared dog!"

       he cried.

"Had I my way some of the insolence would be frozen out of you
before morning."

Mastering his passion, he turned upon Sophie with what he meant to
be a gallant manner.

"If you have a cellar with a good lock," said he, "the fellow may
lie in it for the night, since you have done him the honour to take
an interest in his comfort.

     I must have his parole that he will not attempt to play us
     any tricks, as I am answerable for him until I hand him
     over to the Hetman Platoff to-morrow."
     His supercilious manner was more than I could endure.
     
     A tale of the West, yes--but a most unusual one, touched
     with an almost weird poetic fancy from the very first page,
     when over the sandy wastes sounds the clear sweet whistling
     of Pan of the desert, to the very last paragraph when the
     reader, too, hears the cry and the call of the wild geese
     flying south.


G. P. Putnam's Sons

New York London

       *       *       *       *       *




THE MOON POOL

BY

A. MERRITT


     Romance, real romance, and wonderful adventure,--absolutely
     impossible, yet utterly probable! A story one almost regrets
     having read, since one can then no longer read it for the
     first time. Once in the proverbial blue moon there comes to
     the fore an author who can conceive and write such a tale.
     Here is one!

     Few indeed will forget, who, with the Professor, watch the
     mystic approach of the Shining One down the moon path,--who
     follow with him and the others the path below the Moon Pool,
     beyond the Door of the Seven Lights;--and would there were
     more characters in fiction like Lakla the lovely and Larry
     O'Keefe the lovable.

     Perhaps you readers will know who were those weird and
     awe-inspiring Silent Ones.


G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS

NEW YORK LONDON

       *       *       *       *       *